HIS241 Lecture 3 (12 September 2019)

Europe after Napoleon - States and Societies after 1815
-------------------------------
The German Confederation:
	After Napoleon's time, the number of states in the German Confederation (Deutscher Bund) from 300+ to 39 (35 kingdoms and 4 city states). This is seen as a non-national solution to the "German Problem".
		At the center of it is the two greatest powers of the region: Prussia and Austria.
		They are joined by the medium sized grand duchies and kingdoms: Bayern, Wuerttemberg, Baden, Sachsen, Hannover
	The British are happy with this solution:
		It was the only real superpower in the discussion (+the only global empire)
		The influence of Prussia is kept in control by Austria.
		Austria got the wealthy Italan provinces of Venezia and Lombardy.
		They got to place the Prussians (+ other Germans) at the French border to contain any further French expansion attempts.
	After the agreement, Austria started focusing on the south and east rather than the west.
		Austria was no longer the guardian of Dutch states/independence.
	Some intellectuals believed that this confederation was a way to contain the new political ideas, revolutions and wave of nationalism that was active in the region.
	A new diet was established for the confederation in Frankfurt.
		The representatives had to meet and discuss state matters
		It had ~26 representatives, so it was rather understaffed
		Austria still had power over this diet.
		All decisions had to come unanimously
	Political structure:
		Even though the states were brought together in a confederation, the states kept their traditions and independence.
		Because the territory was so fractured, moving things across or traveling was difficult and expensive.
			The states agreed that they should come with agreements to reduce tariffs between each other to improve transport and trade.
		Voltaire thought of the HRE as a constant structure of rivalires forcing the region to stay in poverty. The new structure was similar.
Austria & Prussia:
	Austria was the largest and most powerful state at the time.
		Austria did not follow the reforms implemented in Prussia: Because they had sided with France after their defeat, they were not forced to implement those reforms.
		In the end, Austria was the representative of traditionalism and conservatism.
		Because they got new territories, they were rather disorganized while trying to incorporate the new states.
	Prussia was a rather radical kingdom by 1815.
		In the previous decades it expanded through careful rule and it was regarded as the new small great power of Europe.
		The great army of Prussia was defeated by Napoleon, they were humiliated and the royal family was exiled.
		Prussia ran through a series of various reforms at the time:
			Political changes: 
				Feudalism was abolished.
				All hereditary servitude (serfdom) was abolished.
				"From November 10 (11?), all men shall be free men"
				Jews got the same social rights as other people.
			Noble lands were seized, free market was implemented.
			The army was reformed: conscription (like that in France) was implemented.
			All social preference was eliminated, personal capabilities were prioritized for ranks.
		Prussia argued in the Congress of Vienna for a strong, centralized state, so they were not entirely happy with the result.
		
What changed? What was reverted?
	THe napoleonic codes and constitutions were kept in some provinces, some wrote their own later. Some abolished everything.
	Ideas of citizenship are abolished.
	The Jewish rights were undone in many states in the confederation.
	The ideas of equality and democracy were seen as a threat and abolished.
	Absolutism resurged. -> The Metternich System and the Karlsbad Decrees, 1819.
		Adopted by Austria and Prussia.
			Criminalize political dissent
			Target the new ideas of nationalism and liberalism
			Target universities, students, artists, press, nationalist fraternities (wherever new ideas may be exchanged)
			State policing expanded
		Implemented to eliminate separatism, political newspapers, new political thoughs, restrictions on universities, etc.
		The cause (excuse) of ths is believed to be the murder of a reactionary absolutist statesman.
		The people in Prussia and Austria who were affected by this went to France.
	Russia was especially authoritarian
		Nicholas II implemented new decrees
		Expanded the state policing
		Started exiling political suspects and foreigners to Siberia.
		
The Concert of Europe
	The nations agreed to come together and discuss things diplomatically rather than resorting to warfare.
	
Poverty in Europe
	Extensive devastation after almost 20 years of warfare.
	Powerty was common across all of Europe
	Prussian agriculture was in turmoil
	Ports of Hamburg and Bremen, which were very wealthy because of Atlantic trade, lost all their wealth because of the blockades
	People of the Rhine region started emigrating, most of them went to France, Brazil and North America. Also to other places.