HIS241 Lecture 7 (26 September 2019)

Responses to Industrialization: Labor Reform and German Customs Union (Zollverein)
-------------------------------
Background:
	Industrialization was made possible in Britain because of the following:
		Widely available energy resources such as rivers
		Workforce no longer involved in agriculture, food and raw resources were imported.
	
Responses to Industrialization in Britain:
	Focus on child labor 
		The Sadler Commission (formed in 1832)
		As a part of the mechanization process, large numbers of children were working in factories.
			Factories preferred children because it was believed that they could easily adapt to the process rather than adults.
			Adults (artisans, skilled laborers) lost their jobs due to industrialization. They had to learn new skills over the already existing ones.
		About 45% of the factory workforce were children at the time.
			The parliamentary commission noticed that the health and education of children were at risk because of child labor
			This formed the background of their new policies.
	Workers' Housing
		Engels saw that around the large factories, housing was rare, unsanitary, in poor conditions.
		Concluded that it was a general problem in all industrial regions.
			-> Working class is packed in slums
			-> Poverty is common
			-> Even though the poor is located in the same place as the wealthy, they are not seen and their situation is ignored.
			
Robert Owen and Utopian Socialism
	Part owner of the New Lanark (textile) Mills in Scotland.
	Has new ideas on how it should be managed so that the condition of his workers should not be like those stated above.
		He believed that the productivity in factories should not be achieved at the expense of workers' life conditions
		* If workers get better housing, education and life conditions, they will be more productive and everyone will benefit from this.
	* The role of factory owner comes with the responsibility to the workers, but also brings authority over them.
		Believed that children should be taken away from the parents so that the culture of poverty and alcoholism won't be carried on.
	* Working classes may be injuriously degraded and oppressed in 3 ways:
		- When they are neglected in infancy
		- When they are overworked by their employer
		- When they are paid low wages for their labour
	-> Associated poverty with alcoholism. Took steps to avoid it happening in the new generation.
	
Great Britain and Industrialization on the European Continent
	Following the Battle of Trafalgar, Britain emerged as the one superpower of Europe.
		They could command the seas to their full effect
		Their blockade had almost destroyed the economy and industry in Germany.
	Germany:
		Hamburg was the main port of entry for the goods from Britain and the New World.
		When the port was blockaded and the city was incorporated into the German Confederation (1806-1815), the city lost most of its resources and business.
			When the war was over, the city was already bankrupt.
			The British firms moved in and bought out a majority of businesses in the city.
			In 1818, Britain was attempting to control the export markets of other nations, mainly of Germany.
				This put the German economy at the risk of becoming a dependency of Britain.
		By the end of the war, about 75% of the population was rural. Poverty was common.
			The Rhineland region was already poor and devastated by the war. Many people sold whatever they had and moved to the New World to find work.
			It declined further because of the British competition.
		The British (and Belgian) capital and expertise led to the industrialization in Germany.
			The big banks that established their presence in Germany followed the French SG model, established in 1822.
		In 1815, the old Prussian provinces had 57 different customs areas. This led to many customs barriers in the region.
			In 1818, Prussia established a number of customs areas in the region to reduce its negative effect on trade.
				They believed that the barriers were the main cause behind poverty
				It also believed that smuggling could be countered by the new trade union.
		In 1828, Prussia and some states joined the first economic customs union
			In 1834, additional states joined, covering most of what became the German Empire.
			Because Austria was excluded, Prussia became the most important power in the region.