HIS241 Lecture 6 (24 September 2019)

Great Britain, the Empire and the Industrial Revolution
-------------------------------


The twin revolutions of the nineteenth century: The French Revolution and the Industrial Revolution
	The French Revolution transformed politics, the idea of states and people.
	The Industrial Revolution changed economies, the demographics and nature of relations between states.
The Industrial Revolution
	During the nineteenth century a world economy was established for the first time. 
	Change happened so quickly and was so thorough that it redefined the society.
	Characteristics:
		Mechanization. Method of production shifted to machines rather than craftsmen.
		Mass production of goods, standardization.
		Many new inventions and new energy sources. Every new invention led to demand for even more.
			Coal was the fuel of the nineteenth century.
			The means of transport and manufacturing was ensured by coal.
		Development of new industries.
			Germany industrialized later, but it caught up fast and later surpassed Britain.
			The steel industry defined the industrial power of nations.
			Railroads covered the entire continent.
Start of the industrial revolution
	It wasn't only centered in Britain, but the entire British Empire, with all the resources, financial connections, need for innovation.
	Background:
		Britain did not lead the idea of imperialism or global trade. Other empires were more successful at it.
		Spain and Portugal had established colonies sooner and had colonies in Africa and the Americas.
		In the 17th century, the economic center of European trade shifted from the Mediterranean to London and Amsterdam.
			* Amsterdam was the most important port in the world.
				Before the developments in trade, most of the wealthy merchants in Amsterdam were Baltic merchants, trading locally
				The Dutch were more successful at overseas trade, and surpassed the Baltic traders.
				Religious tolerance also attracted many merchants and manufacturers, bringing their wealth and business.
				-> Amsterdam was seen as a land of opportunity for those who came there.
			East Asia:
				VOC:
					Started as a union of nine merchant companies, who made a risky voyage to the East Indies.
					Out of 4 ships, only three returned and only 89 out of 200 men survived during the 2 year voyage. They brought valuable goods with them, though. This justified further expeditions.
					The Dutch East India Company was founded in 1602 as a chartered company (recognized and backed by the state)
						It was backed and armed by the state.
						It could bypass some state taxes and regulations. It could also have its own army, manage its own overseas colonies, install its own governors, but had to report to the state regularly.
					In 1605, the VOC had their first military victory, by taking over three regions in the spice islands.
					They later expanded in the region and had a massive military presence there.
						When Jakarta was captured, the city was destroyed and rebuilt in an European fashion, with all accompanying government branches. The city was renamed Batavia.
					The company led the European efforts to colonize India.
						The Dutch were the leading colonial power in the East Indies by 1720, with over 11,000 employees in the region.
						Britain later took over some colonies in the Indian coastline and moved further inland.
				This was made possible through ships navigating around Africa.
				Britain focused on the colonial regions after 1763. They expanded their reach over a majority of India within 100 years.
					They had started trading in the region by early 1700s.
			Transatlantic trade:
				Both in South America and in the Caribbean, massive sugar plantations were established.
					Because sugar farming was a very labor intensive process, slave labor became more important.
					The slave trade became the main focus in transatlantic trade, and a majority of the slaves were sent to the regions with plantations.
						* In one way, the growth and movement of slave trade can be traced with the expansion of sugar growth and trade.
						The sugar growers found it to be the most profitable investment as slave labor was inexpensive in the region.
						By 1600s, slaves made up approx. 70% of population in Brazil.
				Cotton and tobacco was also important in the regional economy.
				In mid 1600s, the British took interest in the region and started fighting the Dutch for control over major trade route.
					They required all British colonies to only trade with British merchant ships.
					Between 1763 and 1815, the British continuously fought the French to take control of their colonies.
					Loss of the thirteen colonies were not seen as a big setback for the empire as it was seen as an important trading partner. They exported major raw materials for over a century.
		Britain had three important materials for the development of industrial revoliton:
			It has an abundant energy source
				The first energy source was water, using water mills
				Coal was later used to drive the steam engines
			It has access to a wide variety of raw resources
			It has close trade relations with counties that exported raw materials.
		The agricultural revolution reduced Britain's dependence on manpower in agriculture. Colonial connections reduced this even further and freed up manpower for the industry.