HIS331 Lecture 12 (06 Dec 2017)

Relations with Russia, Russian Minority, EU, Security Issues
-------------------------------
Exam:
	10/35: 10 short answer questions. From 1944 to present
	10/35: 1 essay. 2 prompts to choose from
	15/35: 1 essay, 2 prompts to choose from
-------------------------------
Most issues in Baltic about Russia.
	Also about the Russian speakers in the area.
	
Citizenship issues:
	Lithuania:
		Granted citizenship to everyone who was a resident at the time of independence
	Estonia + Latvia:
		Had more ethnic minorities (~40-50%), so they didn't give citizenship to all groups.
		Estonia - Brought forward the citizenship law that they had before WW2
		Latvia - Took their time and drafted a new law
		Both: Minority (those who came after annexation) disemfranchised.
			They could still apply for naturalization
			"Minority" does not apply to Russians, but all Sowjet nations.
			
		--> Russian people divided into 3 categories in these 2 countries:
			- Those who are recognized as Estonian & Latvian citizens
			- Those who became Russian citizens but remained permanent residents of Estonia & Latvia
			- The stateless people ("non-citizens", "aliens"); those who haven't applied for citizenship
				They got "alien" passports. They got the same rights both citizens did, but could not vote (in estonia they could vote in local elections)
				
		The naturalization process was not fast
			Just before they joined the EU, people had incentive to get citizenship.
			But after that, it slowed down significantly.
			But for some, not taking citizenship was more useful since they had connections and families in Russia, so they did not want to get a visa. They also got the freedom of movement in the EU.
				Main barrier for citizenship was taking a language exam. People either couldn't complete it, or didn't want to take it.
				
		The parallel school systems (schools that teach mainly in Russian) still present in country after USSR dissolved.
			Estonia and Latvia tried to add the local languages + English + (Finnish in Estonia) to these schools' curriculae to help the graduates get employed
		In early 90's, most Estonians and Latvians turned their backs on Russian language, but since 1/3 of the customers in country are Russian speakers, they had to add that to the national curriculum.
		
In Estonia and Latvia, the Russian speakers dominated the politics in cities. Their decisions could affect the elections significantly
	In Riga, the mayor is a Russian speaker candidate.
	But these parties have been kept out of government with carefully made coalitions.
	There were calls to make Russian the second official language, not accepted
	In 2007, in Estonia, there were calls to remove a bronze soldier statue erected after the WW2.
		Estonians saw this a sign of communist past
		Russians wanted it to remain
		--> This was a major flashpoint between communities.
		- The government decided to move it to a graveyard. There were 3 days of riots + Russian (?) cyber attacks in retaliation
	Even though there were many grievances between communities, this was the only high profile incident.
		But these issues raised the position of Estonia in EU and NATO.
		Estonia pioneered changes to NATO laws and made cyber attacks also a valid form of attack for Article 5.
		
Relations between Baltic states and Russia
	The cyber attacks brought mistrust between the sides
	There were also arguments over whether 1940 annexation was forced or voluntary.
	The Soviet agreements with Germany were also controversial.
	In early 90's, the main issue of concern was withdrawal of Russian troops from Baltic provinces
		In return for removing troops in 1994, the Baltic states had to provide welfare for former troops who decided to remain in Baltic.
		- If this agreement was not made in that time, it would never have happened though. There would also be no EU or NATO membership. They could end up like Georgia.
	
	Borders also took a while to determine.
		Stalin took away parts over during annexation.
			Baltic states argued any agreement made after 1940 was invalid
			Russians argued that 1920 agreements were only guidelines.
		Estonia and Latvia retracted their claim, but wanted the 1920 agreement to have legal continuity. But this would require Russians to acknowledge that the annexation was forced.
	Lithuania had a tricky situation since Vilnus was returned by the Soviets. If Soviets agreed on the 1920 border, they wouldn't have Vilnus or Memel.
		There was also a long series of discussions about Russian access to Kaliningrad. This was only done in 2002 with EU involvement
			Russian claim: Russian citizens in Kaliningrad should travel to Russia without Russia
			EU claim: This requires exceptions to be made in Schengen area. They did not want to make compromises.
			-In the end, they agreed to issue "facilitated travel documents", which are visas that are closely monitored and very cheap to issue.
	
	Even though the border issues were not solved, this would not cause border issues on their entry to EU and NATO. It wasn't because of the lack of trying, but both sides couldn't agree.
		Latvia signed a border treaty in 2007
		Estonia was due to sign a border treaty, but the Russians walked away since Estonians added a preamble referencing the 1920 agreement.
			Especially after the disagreements between Russia in 2007, the sides could no longer agree.
			In February 2014, they added a clause that focuses the document on the border and the border only.
			But at the same time, the unrest in Ukraine started + Crimea was annexed.
			Agreements came to an end again, because of the Ukraine issue.
			(Border agreement has been signed, but neither side's parliament has ratified it.)
			
European Integration
	As stated before Russians had 3 options: Go west, go east, remain neutral. Most integrated with the EU.
		Integration with the west seemed highly unlikely in 90's, but is the most common choice now
		Integration with the east was likely in 90's since Russia was more stable, but their stability didn't last long.
	All 3 countries wanted to get rid of Sowjet influence as fast as possible, so they looked at Finland as an example.
		International community also recommended this role model. They were a Russian neighbour, but they were modernized and neutral.
		In the collective memory, however, neutrality wasn't a favourable option. The 3 states were occupied because they were neutral
		Finns did not want any allies, however. They would rather have no allies than the worst allies.
		But the Baltic approach was to get integrated with as many Western institutions as possible to be closely bound with western organizations.
			The Baltic states also joined the Eurozone. This seemed highly unlikely before because they adopted the currency immediately after the Eurozone crisis.
			But they wanted to be more closely integrated with the European system.
	In the 90's, when Russia was rather benevolent and weak, and when the EU and NATO countries were open and generous,
		So the Baltic states benefited from the generousness.
		The first evaluation of EU candidates was made in 1997, estonia was in the first list mainly because of their free market reforms and fast economic advances.
			The EU did not have problems with a post-Sowjet nation joining the EU because they thought these states would not join NATO anyway.
			But being included in 1 organization made it much easier to join the other.
			
			For example, Ukraine had missed the boat because they wanted to remain in between east and west. In that time, all reforms were easier to implement as the Sowjet legislation had to be replaced anyway, the countries which made the reforms followed EU standards. Now, it is nearly impossible.
	Every year, in their EU progress reports, the Baltic states had to report their plans to better integrate the Russian minority + how to ease the citizenship and language laws.
		In Estonian case, the EU demanded that capital punishment was to be removed.
			Even though Estonia never used the death penalty, they defended their right to use this penalty. Public and media was also against the removal of this punishment.
			But when it was voted in the parliament, the parliament abolished death penalty. The media supported the statesmen immediately.
		Another big issue was justice reforms, free market, tons of legislations that had to be implemented (~80,000 pages).
			This was a very slow process.
		For Lithuania, a major concern was the Lithuanian nuclear power plant, which was built in the same model as the Chernobyl electric plant.
			This plant supplied a majority of Lithuania's electricity needs, was the major source of Lithuanian economy. They feared that their energy security would be threatened.
			They fought the EU to keep their nuclear power plants running.
			But in EU accession, there are no negotiations, only postponements. So Lithuania had to agree, but could decide on when to implement it.
			The Lithuanians got financial compensation for their efforts, but had to close it down.
			There were plans to build a new power plant in Lithuania, but Belarus and Kaliningrad got one instead.
		
		Even though central countries like Poland can afford to go against EU decisions, the Baltic countries needed the security, so they had to agree with plans.
		
NATO
	First step to join was an initiative called "partnership for peace", which was a disappointment for east europe
		But it turned to be useful as it intensified cooperation.
	Having been a part of the Sowjet Union, the Baltic states had major problems joining NATO too.
		NATO need to make deals with Russia so that Baltic states could join.
		Some critics argued that NATO wanted to take over territories in East Europe, but these counries themselves wanted to get NATO's attention.
		The Baltic states had to reform their militaries, but this was easy for Baltic states since they only had to build their institutions from scratch. The reforms were iplemented fast since there wasn't an establihed system with any high-ranking officials
	Cases against Baltic states:
		- Too small
		- Vulnerable (a burden)
		- Hard to defend
	Countries like Baltic states had to prove that they would not pull resources, but would actually provide services to other NATO countries. They also had to send personnel on NATO missions
		- These countries are also less worried about the risks since the citizens of the states would be ready to give up more resources to gain allies.
	Total NATO presence in the first decade: Only an air policing mission based in Lithuania. Since the NATO saw Russia as a partner to their efforts, they did not want to provoke the Russians.
	Estonia used to be one of the 5 NATO members who reached the 2% GDP spending until crimea. Lithuania and Latvia were off the hook since they were hit hard by the financial crisis. After Crimea, they also raised their spending.
	"Smart" power: Having diplomatic power, limited military power, but still using the two well together. That's what Baltic states did for NATO. They gave up some military resources for air policing.
	After Crimea their presence changed.
		Baltic states became interesting because some people think Estonia/Latvia is next.
		There are majority russian speaker regions in both countries.