HIS331 Lecture 1 (13 Sep 2017)

Introduction?
-------------------------------
3B --> 3 baltic states.
N5 + 3B = NB8 --> 8 nordic + baltic states

-Until early 1900's, the "balt" people were Germanic people.
	About 90% of the population (the non-german ones / un-deutsch people) were regarded as lower class.
	Estonian a Finno-Ugric language, Latvians closer to English language families.

The name "Baltic" came from the view that the sea was a belt that separated the civilized Mediterranean and the barbaric north.
The old Prussian tribes lived in Ostpreußen, now in Kaliningrad Oblast.
	They were taken over by other germanic tribes.
	
Many baltic states became independent in 1917.
	The B3.
	Finland was mostly reorganized after independence. They resisted the Soviet influence.
		They shifted their identity from a Baltic country to a Nordic country.
		They were neutral to both sides after WW2.
	The Estonians followed a similar agenda in the last 10-15 years.
		But the neo-liberal approach did not fit in the Nordic identity.
	Lithuanians tried to shift their identity to be associated with Central European cultures.
		They saw themselves as the ones with the highest chance of joining the EU + NATO.
	--> EU always treated the 3 states as a group of similar nations.
	Foreign investors treated the 3 states as one. Most of them established their hq's in Riga, in the middle of the region.
		Riga became the economic capital of the region.
		
		
--------------
The baltic history (as far as we are concerned) starts in the 12th century.
	The northern crusades at the start of 13th century brought the baltic people in historical record.
		--> Written by the colonizers
	The baltic region was on multiple trade routes.
		This attracted German merchants
			They remained in the region until 1900's, shaped their economy, language and culture 
			The German institutions brough the Latvian and Estonian languages together, established connections.
		The local people were not keen on accepting christian people
	A military force was brought to protect the merchants -> Teutonic Knights.
		Teutons --> Were involved in the crusades.
		The crusading spirit continued in Europe
		They were sent to the Baltic + Finland, the last pagan corner in Europe.
		There weren't many crusaders, but they used the territorial rivalries to divide and conquer the tribes.
	The lands of the Teutonic Knights became the territory of Prussia.
	The Danes also landed on Estonia (Talinn) and conquered the region.
		About a century later, they sold their lands to the Teutonic Order.
	The first tribe encountered was the Livs (Livonians), and were closely related to the Prussians.
		During the middle ages, the land was called Livonia after it was christianized.
		(They were the first to be forcibly converted.)
	The Swedes conquered and colonized Finland.
	
	The way that the Estonian and Latvian history is different from Lithuanian history is because of the German hegemony in the region.
		The Lithuanians, however, united under one ruler, who eliminated his rivals and became the king of Lithuania. They resisted the advance of the Teutonic Knights.
		They became one of the biggest countries in Europe, stretching from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea.
			Not only a military expansion, but also as a result of strategic marriages.
			The mongols invaded from the east, so the Kievan Rus became tributaries of the Golden Horde.
			After conquering large lands of Eastern Orthodox population, the Lithuanian king converted to Christianity, mainly in order to marry the queen of Poland.
				This united Poland and Lithuania under one king.
				They aimed to eliminate the treat from the west (Poland) and be more defensible against the Teutonic Knights.
				Lithuania is eclipsed by Poland after the union.
					They are 3 times more populous
					Their literature + written history is more expansive.
					The Lithuanian nobility became indistinct from Polish nobility.
					
	Hansa (The hanseatic league) Monopolized the trade in East Europe.
		They were centered in Lübeck, but had deep trade relations with cities extending from London to Nobgorod.
		There were rivalries between the Hansa and the Nordic kings.
		All cities that became a part of the Hansa prospered during this period.
		
	The Protestant Reformation undermined the legitimacy of old Livonia.
		There are more rising powers in Europe that rely on mercenaries
		The reformation also coincided with the rise of powers around Livonia
			Sweden (later became a major power in Europe)
			Russia (Muscovy became the Russian Empire, under Peter the Great)
				He opened the nation to the west, through the Baltic states.
			Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
		The Great Northern Wars
			The nations listed above fought each other in the Livonian region.
				Ivan IV tried to conquer the Baltic region to break out to the sea.
					Led to the collapse of the feudal order in the region.
					The towns of Livonia scramble for protection.
				At first, Poles, Lithuanians and Swedes were successful
				The Swedes overextended themselves, and they were defeated by the Russians in 1800's.
				Before losing their ground, the Swedes controlled all of the Gulf of Finland coastline.
			Peter built the new capital in the lands that were recently conquered lands, very close to Sweden.
				After the wars ended, Peter guaranteed the rights and priveleges that the Baltic German nobility had.
				The German nobility in the region had great effect in modernizing the empire.
	The nobility in Baltic lands (Estonia, Latvia and Kurland) had great freedoms/advantages in the area.
	The Lithuanians (still in union with Poland), however, are feeling increasing pressure from Russia.
		The partition of Poland-Lithuania in 17th century
			Russians, Austro-Hungarians, Prussians divide Poland-Lithuania in 3 phases, result in full partition.
			The Russian Empire got the largest territory.
				They saw themselves as the protectors of Orthodox Christianity. They justified their takeover with this.
	1795 --> The first time that all 3 baltic states came under the same ruler: Russia.
		Because Lithuania was conquered later, they are integrated into the Russian economic structure, their nobles did not get the German nobility
			But they had the rights of the Russian nobility.
		Poles & Lithuanians repeatedly rebelled against the Tzar, their rebellions were crushed.
		Estonia and Latvia remained loyal, and the nobles were constantly rewarded for their loyalty.