HIS331 Lecture 9 (15 Nov 2017)

Sowjet era from 1941/1945 to 1985 (Until Gorbachev's period)
-------------------------------
There are few written sources about the baltic region in that period, but many historians have written about the repression and resistance/dissent in the region under Sowjet rule.
	In long term (1945-1991), the soviet period isn't all about mass deportations and repression. It's mainly the first years, under Stalin's rule.

Periods:
	1940-41: Occupation and annexation
		Stuff we've seen before the midterm
	1944-53: Terror, collectivization. Stalin
		Deportations. Executions.
		Armed resistance.
		Significant, most people focus on this and ignore the following periods
	1953-68: Thaw. Kruschev
		Liberalization.
		Lessening of terror and repression
		More space for cultural freedoms
		Kruschev was replaced by a triumvirate in 1964
			Kruschev's secret speech in 1956. 
			Denounces the Stalinist policies.
		Amnesties granted.
			People resettled in the far east were allowed to return home.
			"Home" --> Not exactly home.
				Farmers no longer had a farm
				People who had larger homes no longer had homes since they became communal apartments
			Most people were not allowed to dwell in the towns they came from since they were believed to be politically dangerous
			They were met with suspicion with the locals, so they had difficulty in fitting in with the society.
		1968: Prague spring.
			They pursued building communism in their own terms, not that of Moscow's.
			Other Warsaw pact countries intervened, crushed the uprising.
	1968-58: Stagnation. Brezhnev
		Brezhnev first came to power as a part of the triumvirate.
	1985-91: Perestroika. Gorbachev
		Tries to fix the stagnation.
		Since the system is fundamentally flawed, ends up ending communism and dissolving the UdSSR.
		
*
	Totalitarianism was always present.
		People were required to proactively demonstrate their loyalty to the state
			Children were Pioneers
				Symbol: Red neckerchief
			Youth were Komsomol
			--> These organizations were voluntary to join, but children were *expected* to join
				Those who didn't were seen as outcasts.
		The state wanted to have conrol over people's daily lives.
		
Political structure:
	There is a central government in Moskau.
	Each republic also had their minor government structure, modelled after the Moscow system.
	
	The communist party had Politb端ro (Political B端ro), managing the whole system. It is the leading organ.
		Became the leading organ under Stalin's rule.
		Led by the General Secretary (In the union level)
		Republics:
			Led by the First Secretary (In the republic level)
				Some leaders had more influene over their territories than the others.
				Lithuanian leader had more room to maneuever than the others.
				The leaders had to change their policies so that they were aligned with that of the GenSec
			Second Secretary
				Appointed by Moscow.
				An ethnic russian
				Basically the eyes and the ears of the union
		Chairman of the cabinet of ministers (Politb端ro) is the manager of all ministers
		The supreme soviet assembled and discussed/voted on issues
			But they did not make major political powers. They were mostly about civil issues
			The chairman of the supreme soviet was the chairman of the entire republic, but that was only for show. He didn't have a government to control at all.
		Conclusion: The party and the government are different. The party is what matters the most.
	Then there was the central government managing all policies.
	
	When the Soviets returned after the German occupation, there were many opportunists who wanted to be a part of this political system.
		Many people who were originally a part of the ruling governmetn were killed or deported in the war.
		The UdSSR also had many people at hand to appoint to these regions
			These people were those who had settled in the east earlier.
			Stalin had more trust to these people since they were in the UdSSR for over a generation
				+ Stalin did not trust anyone who lived under Nazi rule, thinking that they could have been influenced by the Nazis.
				A majority of the people who were repatriated after the war (+ Nazi occupation) were sent to the gulags. 
			The people brought by Stalin were ethnic Estonian/Latvian/Lithuanian, but they did not speak the language or follow their former cultures
				But they were loyal members of the communist party.
				As the government expanded, they need administrators, so they needed these people.
		As an example, Estonia had 1.5M people by 1980's, but about 100K of them were part of the communist party
			Anyone who aspired to have a higher position in any workplace were expected to be in the communist party
			--> Anyone who had ambition was a part of the communist party
			This changed the structure of the communist party.
				It started as a class struggle party
				But by the end of the UdSSr, university grads were overrepresented because they wanted to advance their careers
				
	After the death of Stalin and the thaw under Kruschev (+ Hungarian uprising of 1956), the resistance ceased. People reached an accomodation with the government.
		The uprising gave the sign that the Sowjets were there to stay.
		People who had ideological opposition to the party saw that following the system was the only way to sustain themselves.
		
	Advantages of becoming a communist party member:
		Members did not have to be on waiting list for goods for months/years
		Most desired privelege was foreign travel.
			To destinations in the Sowjet bloc.
			But ultimately, to Finland + capitalist west (but their families had to stay as hostages so that they would return from their travels.)
		
		
Stalinist slogan of the time: (National in form, socialist in content)
	The national elements were maintained, but russification was pursued over time to reach the Homo Sowjetikus.
	Music festivals were held every 5 years.
		They were declared as national music festivals, but the songs thet the choirs sang were socialist in theme. Also emphasized union of the UdSSR.
	--> Tolerating their cultural differences, but that is not tolerable in the long run.
		
Antanas Sniechkus (1940-74) LiCP
	One of the longest serving people in the region.
	Initially appointed by Stalin, but stayed in office.
		As the policies of Kremlin changed, he made himself indispensible enough to keep his position.
		In Lithuania, there were no purges. (but there were in Estonia - 1950, and in Latvia - 1959)
			The communist leadership were removed, hundreds were kicked from the party, thousands were barred from employmend from their pursued careers.
			Reason: Establishing a more loyal politb端ro. Accused the leaders of supporting the bourgeois + unwillingly supporting Kremlin's programs.
			In the case of purge of Estonia's leader, he urged that the arrested people were not deported but instead exploited in the industry within the republic
			In Latvia's case, it was seen that the thaw under Kruschev's rule led to more room to maneuever in their ruling party, leading to the nationalists insisting that people appointed to Latvia learn Latvian, helping in developing communism in Latvia --> nationalistic elements?
	Sniechkus manipulated the party so well that the Sowjets did not see a reason to purge him.
	Lithuania was also lucky that the Lithuanians emigrated to the West before, so lithuania couldn't be russified with the arrival of people from the russian far east.
		Estonia was roughly 60% latvian by the end of the war
		Latvia was roughly 80% at the end of the war, but they were about 52% at the end of the war.
		Lithuania, however, always had about 80% lithuanian population.
		--> Conclusion: Lithuania + their ruling party was mostly homogeneous
		There were also many people who were moved between countries every 5 years.
		
Nationalism under the Sowjet system:
	All republics have their own flags, but they are all based on the UdSSR flag
		Estonian + Latvian almost the same, with waves. Latvian is soft waves and Estonian is hard waves Lithuanian is with green + White stripes at bottom.
	Example: Sowjetunion erected a monument showing the Estonian + Russian cooperation by showing an estonian warrior and a russian prince. Represents their cooperation against German crusaders.
		--> Shows the sowjets as the "big brother"
		Nationalism moulded into art.
	In the end, their idea is:
		"We can tolerate these people singing their traditional songs and dancing their traditional dances, but they cannot have autonomy"
		
Other differences of the baltic region compared to the rest of UdSSR
	Mass tourism was a new phenomenon in the UdSSR.
		The baltic people were always in a suitable location, but people in the other regions weren't.
		The locals also had more access to information, culture and goods from the west.
		There was also a ferry line between Helsinki and Talinn.
	People in Estonia could see Finnish television (despite the efforts of the Sowjet attempts to jam it)
		They could get:
			News of world events
			An alternative view
		They were also informed on the Finnish consumer industry.
			These weren't present in the UdSSR
	Conclusion: Baltic people were seen as more westernized, modernized. They had differing views and had better access to goods and information.
	
	The collective farming system started disastrous in the region, but they were advanced quickly and became the stronest producers in the union.
		Collective farm centres also became major community centres.
		By the end of the communist era, the communal farm centres paid better than jobs in the cities
		They also offered better access to goods and services than cities to attract more + better people and keep people happy.
		These developments were advertised as the sign of Sowjet modernization
		But because of the arms race, consumer goods weren't in rich supply.
			Also with the effect of corruption, people without contacts didn't have access to some goods.