HIS331 Lecture 3 (27 Sep 2017)

Baltic States During WW1, Independence Movements
-------------------------------
WWI
	The russians pushed the Germans back in the first months of the war, but they were easily defeated.
	As the Germans advanced, the frontline rested on the Baltic states.
		Lithuania: Mostly german occupation
		Estonia: Mostly untouched
		Latvia: Devastation. The frontline was mostly here. People displaced, property destroyed
	The disastrous Russian military efforts led to the eruption of February Revolution (in March)
		A spontaneous rising which leads to the abdication of the tsar, Nikola II.
		Protests started on international women's day by women because there was no food
		Workers joined them
		Change of power. The provisional government recognized internationally.
		The Estonian people + soldiers started protesting. They put forward the same demands they did in 1905.
			Democracy
			End of Russification
			Distribution of lands
			-The provisional government accepted most demands. One of the largest developments was the establishment of Estonia as a province (Southern Estonia was in Livonia before then. North + South were united.)
		The same thing does not happen for Latvia since half of their territory is occupied by Germans.
		Lithuanians don't get anything since they are completely occupied by Germans.
			The Lithuanians start negotiating with the Germans instead. The Germans start cooperating as they want to divide the local people and legitimize their influence.
		The provisional government sent commissioners to Estonia + unoccupied Latvia instead of the governors. These commissioners are ethnic Estonian + Latvian.
			Provincial affairs are also run in the local languages.
	Aleksandr Karensky's (minister of war) big mistake was to remain committed to the efforts of Western powers. He was committed to start another offensive in summer 1917.
		Influenced by the ideas of the French revolution.
			-That the peasants were given arms to defend the revolution, fight for their land
		Believed that now that the peasants were liberated in a revolution, they would be willing to fight the Germans.
		Many soldiers in the army also tried to bring the effect of the revolution to the army. They tried to reform the organization + hierarchy.
			These soldiers took it to the logical extremes. They wanted to elect their officers, lynch unpopular officers (most of whom were German officers).
		As a result, this offensive was more disastrous than all previous offensives.
	Bolsheviks ("Majority") took this failure to rise. They were the most extremist, radical communist party.
		Even though they were minority, they called themselves the majority.
		Bolsheviks want to topple the whole class system and put the workers in power
			They saw this revolution as a complete restructuring of the country
			They believed that the workers did not know what they wanted, and their word would convine the workers on what they actually want
			-Lenin was in a rush and wanted to force the revolutionary structure
		Mensheviks wanted to maintain the social situation, worked with the existing structure
			They saw this as an evolutionary process
		Having started as allies, the Bolsheviks squeezed everyone out of the government.
	The Soviets ("Council" of workers, sailors, soldiers...)were created.
		They arise as a challenge as a challenge to the Russian provisionary government.
		They mainly appear in the cities. They cooperate with the provisional government, but still claim legitimacy.
		The provisional government said there would be an election after the war was over. The Soviets also said the same thing, that they would participate.
			But the Soviets did not follow the parliamentary structure. Those who spoke first and loudest would be listened to.
			What separated them from the others was their 3-word slogan. "Peace, Bread, Land" (They were the only ones demanding immediate peace with Germans)
				Karensky still followed a policy of war against the Germans.
				Other sides saw this as betrayal to their country.
				Lenin starts talking to the Germans about peace.
		The October revolution happens.
			(Though this is seizure of power by the armed minority)
		As soon as the Bolsheviks took the power, the other parties are forced to join their side.
		The provisional government officials flee.
			Many of them still thought that because the Bolsheviks were following an idealistic revolution, they would fail to change anything (that they would have their moment and disappear)
		The Bolshevik Red Guards surround the meeting and disperse the assembly meeting, ends the democratic rule in 1918.
	The Bolsheviks try to negotiate with the advancing German forces.
		They at first don't know what to do with the Bolsheviks.
		It was actually the Germans who had sent Lenin back to Russia from his exile in Switzerland to destabilize the country. They did not think that he would do more than that.
		Trotsky signs the Brest-Litovsk agreement in 1918, agreeing to cede great amounts of land in Russian borderlands.
			Lenin was not bothered by this. He sought to consolidate their power first. Capital was moved to Moscow to control the heartlands of Russia.
			At the time, there were still the Whites. (In Siberia, Crimea, Arctic) And they did not have much power in the nation. Their officers also disagreed in many issues.
		The Germans stil advance. They already controlled the Baltics.
	Woodrow Wilson's idea of National Self Determination
		Aimed against the enemy nations. Intended to divide the people of the region into multiple smaller nations, ruled by the local nationalities
		The idea immediately spread to all sides. Many nations and cities wanted to have the right of self determination.
		Also present in the Baltics + among the Bolsheviks
			Did not believe that the lands were given to the Germans. Self-determination would determine the true fate of the nations
		Finland was the first nation to use this idea and proclaim independence. (6 December 1917)
			Finland's civil war did not take a long time. The Whites won the civil war, but many Reds died after the civil war, as prisoners.
		Estonian provisional assembly (Elected in summer 1917) declared its sovereignty in Fall 1917. They declared their independence in underground meetings because of the ongoing Bolshevik influence.
			On 23 February 1918 the Bolshevik forces retreat as the Germans are advancing
			On 24 February 1918, they have full control of the region
			On 25 February 1918, the Germans take over
			Because of the day they spent independendent, the Allies recognize the independence of Estonia.
				This was mainly to deny Germans the legitimacy of their rule in the region.
				Also to keep the Germans busy in the east.
				At the same time, the Allies started supporting the whites against the Bolsheviks.
				Turned the Baltic issue into an international issue rather than a regional issue
			As the Germans take over the region, they are welcomed by the Baltic Germans. Together, they aim to reverse the russification. This region would remain in connection with the German Empire.
				They aimed to create one Baltic state (duchy), dynastically linked to the German nobility.
				But Germany capitulates before this can happen.
					This is a major cause in the rise of Nazism. Believing that the poltiicans have betrayed them (stabbed them in the back) by giving up a war that could be won.
		
	Konstantin Pats is arrested by the Germans.
		
	Lithuanian national council meets in 1917 and declares Lithuania as a nation. All under the German occupation.
		The Germans were not interested in an independent Lithuania, but saw this as a bargaining chip against the Russians. The Lithuanians petitioned Petrograd for independence.
		One of the members become the dictator of Lithuania in 20s and 30s.
		Lithuania wants to achieve national self determination, but they have to cooperate with the occupying German forces.
		Lithuanians were given a German King. Wilhelm von Urach (from the Hohenzollers). The national council elected him.
			The same person could also be the king of Albania (but did not?)
			But he did not become the Lithuanian king either.
			
	Estonia's declaration of independence
		It was a totally democratic nation.
			Most other nations did not believe that they would be recognized as legitimate countries if they did not have a king. (Examples: Norway, Lithuania)
		The declaration came during the chaos after the Bolsheviks took power.
		The Germans were also advancing. They refused to recognize Estonian independence
		Estonians become independent as soon as the Germans withdraw.
		They pushed the Bolsheviks back with the help of Finnish Whites. British navy also blocked access to Petrograd.
			Estonians still argue that they deserve all the credit
			Finns argue that their efforts secured their independence
	
	Ignoring the agreement to ensure national self determination, the Bolsheviks take a majority of the Baltic states.
		Their aim is to go through Riga to central Europe, to spread the socialist revolution to the world.
		The Latvian riflemen, who fought along the Russians in the war, joined the Bolsheviks because they were also against the whites. They became the Latvian Red Riflemen.
			They were important in protecting the revolutionaries during the civil war.
		The initial regional government had to work with the Germans since they had no military in the region.
			But because the Western Allies feared that Bolshevism would spread, they asked the Germans to remain in Baltic region.
			Because the regional Latvian government cooperated with the Germans, they were seen as suspects.