HIS331 Lecture 8 (1 Nov 2017)

The Stalinist Era (44-53)
-------------------------------
In Estonia, Estonian soldiers fought for both sides (Estonian Waffen SS and Red Army)
	"1944" - A movie about the war in the Baltic States.
	"Fighting for a foreign uniform is losing in any proposition."
	The Soviets mobilized tens of thousands of Estonians before the Germans arrived, they fought in the Red Army
	The Germans later mobilized the Estonians and Latvians when the Soviets started advancing
		There were more Latvians serving the Waffen SS than the Estonians
		These people wouldn't be allowed to fight in the Wehrmacht normally.
	The Lithuanians, however, did not form a Waffen SS force during the war.
		They were among the few nations which did not provide soldiers during the war.
		Since the poles were not considered as suitable material for the German army, and the Lithuanians were treted similarly.
	The Estonians and Latvians did not have partisans resiting German occupation.

The Soviets started taking the Baltic states back at the start of 1944.
	By fall (~September) 1944, the baltic states were "liberated" or "reconquered".
	The war continued in the Baltic states until the final day of the war.
	
The German retreat also caused many civilians to leave the Baltic states, fearing that they would be imprisoned or deported when the Soviets returned
	~100,000 Estonians, ~60,000 Latvians, ~20,000 Lithuanians
	The Estonians tried to make it to Sweden. Many of the boats sunk by Soviets or weather
	The others moved to Germany to work in the German industries.
	
After the war, many cities in the region were devastated by the fighting. Most of the cities depopulated

The borders of East Europe were redrawn by Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt. These were mainly dictated by Stalin.
	For the big 3, the Baltic states weren't an issue. It would be incorporated to the USSR.
	Roosevelt asked Stalin to respect democratic demands in the regions. Since Stalin could manipulate the elections, it was no problem.
	A major concern was Poland, which was shifted westwards at the expense of Germany.
		East Poland and Kaliningrad Oblast was occupied by the USSR.
		Königsberg was named Kaliningrad after Kalinin, holder of one of the highest offices in the USSR.
		Kalinin had close connections with the Baltic region. He was involved in the shipbuilding industry of the region.
		The Germans either fled or were evacuated. The region was repopulated by the Russians.
	The Soviets gave Wilna and surrounding area to Lithuania.
		But they did not give all of their promised territories to Lithuania.
		The Poles in the Wilna region were resettled with an agreement between Soviet Union and Poland (People transferred voluntarily or *some* encouragement)
		Poles still form a significant minority of the population in the region.
		After the jewish population were killed or resettled, the vacancies in the city was filled by Lithuanians from the countryside.
	About 5% of Estonia and Latvia were taken by the USSR
		Russians were the ethnic majority there
		Narva was a border city with mixed ethnicity.
		The ethnic minorities were not allowed to return and the city was rebuilt as a model Soviet city.
	The Swedish population in the island of Ruhnu was evacuated by Sweden, and the island became an Estonian island.
	Germany was partitioned between the UK, France, USA, USSR and Poland.
	The Soviets demanded that the people who fled the Baltic region were to be returned.
		The people who were in the western ocupied territories were not returned since the Western states did not recognize the Soviet occupation of the Baltic states
			These people spent some time in refugee camps and they aimed to leave the country soon
				Germany was devastated by allied bombings.
				There were food shortages
				There was no industry remaining
			Many of these people moved to Commonwealth states and the US.
		The people in the east weren't as fortunate.
		
Even though the Germans were defeated and the region was occupied, fighting continued in the Baltic region.
	There was still armed resistance in the regions, fighting the Soviets
	After Stalin died in 1953, an amnesty for the "Forest Brothers" was released.
	The partisans were (about 10 times, based on deaths) more active in Lithuania.
		These people did not see themselves as a band of guerillas, but as a legitimate extent of the Lithuanian government
		These people wore Lituanian army uniforms followed Lithuanian army structure
		After the allies have disagreements, the British tried to establish contacts with (and support) the Lithuanian partisans.
			The Brits thought that this would give them a support in the region that the region could support the British efforts if the Soviets weakened and could be invaded.
		Though the Brits aimed to support the partisans, but the British counterintelligence agencies also had communist agents.
			There were multiple British spies defected to the USSR. They provided information to the Soviets.
			Many of the agents who were sent to the region were actually Soviet double spies, who gave false information to the Brits.
		
		There was greater Lithuanian organization against Germans. These people took their arms and went to the forest
		Since Lithuania is a devoted catholic country, it was easier for the partisans to form in the country.
		
		The simplest explanation: 
			There were more young Lithuanian people around since the Soviets could not mobilize the Lithuanians at the start of the war. 
			The Lithuanians also didn't allow themselves to be recruited in the army.
	There was less activity in other countries
	
The Hungarian uprising of 1946 showed that the Allies were not going to support the partisans. These people gave up their arms when amnesty was released.
	In 1949, another wave of deportations was held in the region.