HIS331 Lecture 5 (11 Oct 2017)

Baltic States in Interwar Period - II
-------------------------------
Names to Remember
Smetona
Päts
Ulmanis
-------------------------------
Developments in the countries:
	Incorporating the peasants to the local nationality, culture
	Languages were made official languages of state business, languages restructured and officialized
	Many of the German nobility lost their status as the upper/ruling class. They became an official minority, treated that way.
		Many migrated to germany
		Those who remained were mostly in the Memel region.
			Hitler despised these Baltic Germans since they were the old, traditional landholders.
	The jewish community (mainly in Lithuania) divided into different groups
		Zionism (jews returning home) was very popular.
		Hebrew was the language that these people had to learn
		But the most common language among them were Yiddish (closer to German)
		There were also many different religious/political views among the jews in the region.
	
	In order do distance themselves from the Germans and Russians, the Baltic states. British and French empires looked like a good option.
		French was also the common language of diplomacy
		
	Universities were established
		(University of Tartu, University of Latvia,Vilnus University)
		There were hopes that these universities would be Estonian and Latvian universities, but most of the professors were German and Russian.
			Professors of their own nationality were educated in the following generations
		The university of Vilnus was the only historical university in Lithuanian claimed territory (but it was in Poland), so Lithuania had to establish a new university.
			It was done in Kaunas by the provisional government, in its capital.
			Still, Kaunas was regarded as a temporary capital only.
	
	To set up a strong community, changes were made to the society
		Some jobs were taken over by the local majority ethnicities
		Language institutions were established
		Nationalizing the population. Mainly targeted at the national minorities
			Latvia:
				Latgale was a historical russian province, not under the control of Baltic Germans. They considered themselves as a different nationality + language.
			Estonia: 
				The groups Seto and Vöro were in the Russian empire, then were given to Estonia when they signed a peace treaty.
					Trying to create a uniform national language, speaking the local dialect was not allowed in these regions.
				The Ingrians (Finnish group) lived in the northeastern Estonia.
				The Estonian state tried to integrate these people too.
			Lithuania:
				The minority group which had the hardest time were the Poles.
					The Lithuanian nationalism was based on shedding any cultural influences from Poland.
					The Poles in Lithuania faced hostility
		The Pagan past became dominant in art and religion in the region.
			The religious organizations became nationalized in content
			The Swedish period in Estonian history is glorified
				-Mainly for the way they treated the peasants leniently and limited the rights of Germans
			In 1840's, a significant number of peasants had converted to Orthodox christianity.
				After the Russian state collaped, the Bolsheviks started to promote atheism.
				Having cut off relations with the Russian church, the local churches fell under the jurisdiction of constantinople.
				The russian patriarchs were also in constantnople during this period.
			Midsummer (summer solstice/"St. John's Day") was still the most important holiday in Estonia and Latvia.
			In Estonia and Latvia, there were movements countering the christian influence.
				They tried to create a native religion opposed to the established organized religion.
			
			
Political developments:
	Lithuania:
		The population was substantially more rural compared to Estonia and Latvia (~80% of the population)
			As a result, the socialists (who depended on factory workers and intellectuals) didn't have a large support base
		The largest parties were the Christian Democrats, and the Populists (the people's party)
			Christian Democrats:
				Their main supporters were the farmers
				Closely linked with the catholic church
				The dominant party in the parliamentary democracy until 1926.
					In one election, they even established an absolute majority.
				By 1926, the Lithuanians got tired of them having full control --> mainly leading to corruption
			Populists:
				Had a secular orientation
		In may 1926, the christian democrats remained the largest party, but every other party formed a coalition excluding the christian democrats
			(The Vatican decided that Vilnus should remain Polish. This was a huge blow to the prestige of the Christian Democrats)
			This coalition also reverted many changes taken by the christian democrats
			They can now be described as progressive reforms, but were seen as dangerous reforms by the christian democrats supporters.
			-Releasing political prisoners, allowing polish minorities to establish polish language schools, signing a friendship agreement with the USSR (and USSR recognized lithuania's claim on Vilnus)
			The Christian Democrats also wanted to decrease defense spending, reducing the number of professional officers
				Their conspirators take over the government in a bloodless coup.
				They had no long-term goals, they only wanted to remove the un-patriotic government.
				At this time, Italia and Poland were the only examples of dictatorships. In both of those cases, the military leaders had power. But these people did the coup for the people.
				--> They recruited Smetona to be the president of Lithuania.
					He was a respected founding father of the country.
					He promised to defend the constitution.
					Everyone who opposed the liberals' actions rallied under Smetona.
						The Christian Democrats also allied with Smetona with the hopes of returning the reforms that were undone after they won the next election
						But Smetona had no intention of giving up power.
	Estonia:
		With the great depression, instability was rising. Unemployment, bankruptcy was common.
		Devaluing their currency was a major debate in the parliament.
		Later, they end up devaluing their currency.
		As a result of this, the Estonian Veterans (Vaps) rise.
			They start as a lobbying group for the independence war veterans' interests.
			Later on, they start fighting the alleged corruption of the political parties.
			Estonia did not have the position of presidency, buy Päts wanted to establish that position.
			In the situation of uncertainty and economic crisis, he was seen as the only person capable of taking Estonia out of parliamentary crisis.
		Amendments to the constitution was proposed to create the office. The centre-right was supportive of this amendment, but the socialists were against it, arguing that it could be dangerous.
		The vaps also supported the position of presidency. They were not a parliamentary force, but they were credible people as they were patriots.
			Due to the political system in the country, the vaps did not have the means to have majority in the parliament.
			Just like the (fascist) parties of Italy and Germany, the vaps also declared themselves as a movement, working for the will of the people.
		The vaps torpedoed the first amendment because they did not believe this amendment went far enough. The socialists were always against it. It fails, closely.
		The second amendment is a bigger failure. It is watered down to gain the support of the socialists.
		In october 1933, the vaps proposed an amendment. It gathered enough signatures to be sent to the parliament. If the parliament refused it, it could be turned to a referendum.
			It won overwhelmingly in a referendum in 1933.
		Using their momentum the vaps become the largest political force in the country.
			They aimed to take over the country democratically.
			They win a clear sweep in the 3 largest cities in the municipal elections, but they were not popular in the countryside.
			In march 1934 (a month before the scheduled election), Päts declares a state of emergency and orders the arrest of many prominent vaps members.
				Päts also declares Leidener as the acting commander of the military.
				He says that the vaps are funded by the nazis.
					The parliament agrees to hold a state of emergency for 6 months since the parties would be losing seats if there was an election.
				Many conservatives believed that a temporary dictatorship was preferable to extremists (vaps) gaining power.
			After 6 months had passed, he continued extending the state of emergency year after year, promising that each time would bring a solution.
	Latvia:
		The most heavily industrialized region in the Russian empire at the start of WWI.
		Was severely devastated during the war, population became more agricultural after the war since the factories were moved away.
		Like Päts, Ulmanis declares a state of emergency 2 months after the Estonian one.
			(He was also the leader of the agrarian union)
			He argued that this was necessary to get rid of the extremist elements.
			By 1936, he banned all political parties. When his term came to an end, he marged all political positions and became the ruler of the people.