HIS331 Lecture 7 (25 Oct 2017)

Soviet Occupation + German Occupation
-------------------------------

When the Baltic states were incorporated into the USSR, they became SSR's (Soviet Socialist Republics), all of which became independent after 1991.
	The western states, mainly the US did not recognize the incorporation of these republics into the USSR.
	Even those this non-recognition did not help the Baltic states practically, they were not recognized as "successor states" to the USSR, but became states which were liberated from illegal occupation
	Property was seized, and many people fled the country.
	
The newly elected governments of these republics visited Moscow and asked to be incorporated to the USSR. Their request was accepted.
	All of these counries drafted declarations, renaming the country as SSR's.
	The Baltic armies became incorporated into the Red Army, being reformed as divisions.
	Päts and Ulmanis were complicit with the Soviet pressure. As soon as the elections took place, however, the two were arrested and imprisoned.
	Smetona (of Lithuania) fled the country before the Soviets arrived, settled in Cleveland.
		This was good for the Soviets, because they made Smetona look like an unpopular dictator who should have been replaced.
	Soviet troops entered the Baltic SSR's, paraded in the counries.
		Peter Square -> Freedom Square -> Stalin Square -> Hitler Square -> Victory Square -> Freedom Square
	
	After the reforms, the Soviets called these developments as spontaneous socialist revolutions, but there were almost no socialists in the counries.
	The descendants of Balts who moved to eastern Russia (who had Soviet upbringing) were brought back to the Baltic SSR's to help with the Soviet administration.
	Textbooks were destroyed, replaced with text glorifying the people of the October Revolution

After the Soviets came in, they made many changes to the countries.
	The local currencies were replaced by the Ruble, which was brought at a very unfavourable exchange rate.
	The elites were arrested and deported
		Mainly the old nobles, clergy, anyone who had opposed the Soviet rule, the upper class.....
		The most notable series of arrests was made on 14 June 1941, where people were loaded on freight trains, sent to gulags in Siberia.
		The people who were called to be deported were informed in the middle of the night and pack their belongings in 1 hour, without hearing of their offences
		~10,000 in Estonia, ~15,000 in Latvia, ~18,000 in Lithuania
		This all happened in the weeks before Barbarossa.
		
After the German occupation
	For many, the German arrival was a relief from the Soviet terror in the past weeks
		They were regarded as the lesser evil
	As the Germans planned to expand their Lebensraum, the racially unworthy were pushed to the east.
		The lands occupied in this process were manned by German families.
		In the Generalplan Ost, of the Baltic peoples, the Estonians were about 50% racially were, Latvians were 25% wothy and Lithuanians were treated the same as Poles
			Estonians were favoured because there was a lot of mixing between Estonians and Baltic German. --> "they had some benefit from the German overlords"
		In the view of Germans, it was the survival of the fittest, for the greater good.
		
	The Baltic states were divided into different Reichskomissariat (Reichskomissariat Ostland)
		The rest of Russia under military jurisdiction
		Occupied territories were managed by the Ostministerium and Kaosministerium.
		Göring's 4-year plan aimed to improve the economical production of the region, by increasing arms production.
		The SS and SH were also working together (and sometimes challenging the civil administration's authority) to carry out the ethnic cleansing plans.
		Heinrich Lohse became the Reichskomissar of the region, ruled the region as he willed.
			Estland, Lettland, Litauen and Belarus had different managers, each with varying interests.
		SS also had extensive influence over the civil government.
		
	The Germans weren't able to find many supporters among the Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian people.
		Some people who were supporting the Soviets also supported the Germans, working as double agents.
			These people wanted to avoid being found out as former Soviet supporters
		About 8000 people were also killed in Estonia, mainly by other Etonians (Partisans), under suspicion of collaborating with the Soviets
		The locals thought that by driving the Soviets out, the Germans would restore the independence of Baltic states.
			But this was later found out to be false as Germans did not have such plans.
			The 3rd Reich did not return the nationalized properties, only took over the properties which were taken by the Soviets.
			As a result, the Baltic states didn't even have any autonomy. But the Germans were better at leading the impression that this was only a temporary situation.
				The Germans allowed national colours to be displayed
				They also resumed religious services.
		When the Soviet forces were caught by surprise, the Lithuanian partsans took over and set up a provisional government. This provisional government was allowed to continue for about 6 weeks until they were taken over.
		Estonian partisans also continued guerilla warfare against the Soviets which were retreating.
			One of the largest deaths at sea during the war occured when a Soviet convoy left Talinn and cruised through a Finnish minefield off the coast of Estonia.
		
	Dr. Walter Stahlecker was an SS member (Brigadeführer and Generalmajor der Polizei), doctor of law, was personally responsible for actions taken against the Jews.
		He led the Einsatzgruppe A, which operated in the Baltic states and Northwestern Russia, killing Jews, Gypsies and Communists.
		He wrote two reports, detailing the activities of his command in the Baltic region.
			In the reports, he explained that the first step was to start pogroms, showing that the native populatino wanted to take action against the Jews
			Later, partisans were recruited to take action, mainly by mass killings.
			However, the Jewish participation to the workforce was acknowledged, and people knew that they would not be replaced immediately, so it was a slow process.
			Ghettos were establihed in Kowno to solve the rivalry between people --> "for their own safety"
		After the Warsaw ghetto uprising in 1943, however, there were common executions in all ghettos.
		In the meeting to determine the Endlösung, the representative of Ostland boasted that Estland ist Judenfrei.
			--> Not exactly true, since 3/4 of Jews survived by escaping to the USSR.
				Estonian Jews had 2 months to escape, so they were lucky
				Since Estonia had so few jews, there were not mass killings. Each jew was interviewed and records were kept.
				Germans brought in Jews to Estonia to work in the oil shale production industry. When the workers had no more use, they were executed.
				A concentration camp in Estonia was Klooga, but the victims were almost entirely foreign Jews.
			But in Latvia and Lithuania, about 90% of jews were killed.
				Since they had 3 days, they could not escape.
		As the Soviets were advancing, the Germans tried to evacuate the Jews to be exploited in other camps.
			But the Soviet advance was too fast for the Germans to respond. The Jews were killed on spot.
			The Klooga kamp was the first camp that was found out and photographed.
		Jews were not the only victims
			Gypsies were also affected
			Also Soviet POW's (~200,000)
				Germans weren't prepared to see prisoners in those massive numbers.
				Most of the prisoners died, but not at will, but by starvation and disease.
				Stalin regarded those who surrendered as traitors, so they were not categorized as victims in this period.
		Stahlecker's maps and documents were used in the trials against the Germans after the war.