HIS331 Lecture 6 (18 Oct 2017)

Authoritarian states in the Baltic, Cont'd
Foreign policies of the Baltic states, before WWII.
Outbreak of WWII and Sowjet ultimatum
-------------------------------

AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES IN THE BALTIC DURING THE INTERWAR ERA:
	Often called fascist regimes, but some refer to them as temporary regimes steering the states back to democracy.
	Problems with democracy:
		No long term planning, things were hardly getting done
		Fractured parliamentary structure
		Constitutional design flawed
		The great depression also afected the baltic state economies
		Stronger executive powers were needed.
		
	Another movement in Latvia
		They wanted to have latvia for latvians, not supporting other religions an nationalities
		The new young generation also did not like the fact that some professions were mainly served by foreign nationals.
		
	-At the time, it wasn't known that these people would turn their countries into a dictatorship.
		-> An incremental movement towards authoritarianism.
		-> "They were reacting to the rise of dangerous movements, to save democracy."
		These men were also well-known men. They were the founders of their states + incumbent prime ministers
			They were also related to the farmers of their country. --> Most of the country farmers at the time.
		
	The Baltic states under authoritarian regimes:
		Small enterprises were supported at the time (Also in Germany)
			ESTONIAN and LATVIAN businesses were supported, not the foreign + Baltic German businesses.
		Infrastructure was also developed (Also in Germany, mainly through the Autobahn)
		+ Austerity would have led to political instability.
		
		The Rulers:
			Päts (LAT) became more powerful when the currency devaluation issue was solved by the previous prime minister.
				Because he was trained as a lawyer, he was able to negotiate to extend his rule
				He also modified the constitution in 1938. 
					This supported his rule since the elections were not public elections anymore, but a parliamentary election.
			Ulmanis (EST) tried to change the image of the counry.
				He was not worried about his situation. He believed that he was following the people's will.
			Smetona (LIT) was the longest ruling dictator among the three.
		Because the people still remembered the problems of a fractured parliamentary system, so they did not want more political parties.
			(Also used by Putin, to discourage new parties by supporting a stronger state + ruling party)
			
	Lithuania became an authoritarian regime when the economy was stable
		There was a stronger nationalist movement
		People did not expect a long term dictatorship
		
FOREIGN POLICIES OF THE BALTIC STATES IN THE INTERWAR ERA, BEFORE WWII
	A preferable way to ensure security in the interwar era: forming blocs
		The three states knew that they had to form a Baltic League
		But the Poles seized the Lithuanian capital, Wilna.
		Estonia, Latvia, Poland, Finland start talks to form a league
			But Finland left the talks early.
				On one side they wanted to grow closer to the former-russian states (This could drag them to a war easily, with USSR and Germany)
					Finland is also close to Germany because of their support during independence
					But baltic states were hostile to Germany because of their involvement after WWI
				But they also wanted to establish diplomatic and cultural ties with the Scandinavian countries. (Also a safer option since Sweden is neutral)
					The Swedes were not interested in developing ties with Finland
			After Finland leaves, only Estonia, Latvia and Poland remains. The first two are not happy since Poland would be favoured in the talks
		Estonia and Latvia form a defensive union.
			They also wanted to add Lithuania to the union
			But the other countries did not like this idea since they wanted to have many independent small nations to make conquering/influencing them easier.
			Germans + Russians were able to undermine the diplomatic efforts with favourable trade deals.
				The immediate commercial advantages disrupted long term strategic movements
	In july 1920 Lithuania signed a peace treaty with the sowjets, and USSR recognized Lithuanian independence + Lithuanian claims on the Wilna region.
		The USSR wanted to divide the powers in the region by raising tensions and mistrust.
		There was hostility between Lithuania and Poland. Their borders were closed in the Wilna region.
	In 1923, during the international attempts for mediation, a Belgian diplomat suggested a federation between Poland and Lithuania
		Still, no proposal could be reached on the ownership of Wilna
		France and Britain favoured Poland since Poland was the key to dividing German interests to two fronts.
	Germany lost Memel in the Versailles treaty. It was made a LoN mandate with the intention of transferring it to Lithuania.
		Following Polish attempts to claim Wilna, Lithuania held a mutiny to take control of Memel mandate.
		The LoN required that Lithuania had to respect the Germans' right to rule in the region.
			They tried to integrate the Germans to their structure
			But since Memel was the first major port of Lithuania, they had to follow the demands of the LoN
		This became a problem with the rise of Hitler, when most of the Germans in Memel also supported Hitler's regime and disrupted Lithuanian efforts.
	In 1934, a Baltic Entente was signed between Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania
		But Estonia and Latvia refused to take part in the Memel and Wilna disputes
		This was not a military agreement either. It is only a cooperation and friendship agreement. 
		The countries also had different focuses.
			Lithuania saw USSR as their only friend, and they saw Poland as their main enemies.
				But they were isolated in the region.
					Sowjets + Germans had signed a nonagression treaty with Poland. 
			The other two had to unite against USSR + Hitler's new government
		The entente did not live up to its expectations when Sowjets and Germans issued ultimatums on the baltic states
			Rather than cooperating, the states made deals on their own.
	
	The new states (Including the baltic states) were eager to participate in the LoN
		They believed that the LoN would protect the interests + sovereignty of member states
		But Hitler took Germany out of the LoN
		Italy also invaded Ethiopia in 1935. Ethiopia asked for help, but the LoN did nothing.
			This also undermined the credibility and authority of the LoN in Europe.
		The Italian invasion of Ethiopia changed the diplomatic efforts of these counries.
			They wanted to make agreements with other powers to ensure their sovereignty.
		
	When the baltic states were first established, the most likely ally for these states would be GBR.
		GBR was the strongest power in the world
		They also assisted the baltic states in gaining their independence.
		They also had extensive trade relations with the British (Germany was their second largest trading partners)
		--> So the baltic states hoped that GBR could support them
		But GBR had more pressing issues. India, for example, was a major concern for them, and maintaining their empire was more important than defending other countries.
		The Brits also made it clear that they would not take part in conflicts in the Baltic when they signed the Anglo-German naval agreements, limiting the British presence in the Baltic.
			As a result, Germany had an increasing influence in the Baltic region.
			The Baltic states also wanted to sign agreements with the Germans, but something unexpected happened in the meantime.
			
	MOLOTOV-RIBBENTROP pact:
		As the Nazis wanted to remove communism from Germany + Sowjets saw fascism as a great threat, nobody thought cooperation was possible
		They signed an agreement, expanding their spheres of influence in the Baltic.
		Czechoslovakia and Austria had capitulated. Germany wanted to expand their influence to Poland after that.
		GBR + France sent a delegation to Sowjetunion to sign a pact against the Germans, but Germans suddenly proposed an immediate pact between the countries.
			Germans had offered the Sowjets a deal much more favourable than what the western powers could offer.
			The Sowjet policy was also to attack immediately rather than waiting for defense, so they did not want to across other countries --> deal more feasible for their interests.
		Hitler believed that Germany lost WWI because they fought on two fronts. So they wanted to eliminate Poland and have one side secure.
		
WWII IN EUROPE
	Germans bombarded the free city of Danzig in the morning of 1 September 1939.
	France and GBR honoured their deals and declared war on Germany.
	Still, Germans captured Danzig within hours.
	Hours later, the Sowjet soldiers entered Poland, arguing that the Polish government could no longer effective. They occupied east Polan.
	Stalin issued an ultimatum on the Estonian government to allow establishment of Sowjet military bases in Estonia
		Stalin claimed that Estonia was unable to control and protect its own territorial waters.
		A Polish submarine (taking shelter in Estonia) escaped from the port of Talinn and made it to GBR to continue fighting the Germans. Russians used this as an excuse.
		In the end, Estonia agreed to allow 25,000 troops to be stationed.
		When they gave in to the demands of the Sowjets, the others followed the same way since their allies were being taken over one by one.
	The Germans did not support the Baltic states.
	The Baltic states did not object. They believed that they would survive the war unharmed if they gave in to Sowjet demands without resistance.
		Lithuania was eager to accept the agreement since they wanted control of Wilna.
		Later, Germans swapped Estonia for parts of Poland.
		
	Germany made agreements with the Sowjet + Estonian + Latvian states and call the Baltic Germans home.
		But they were settled in German-occupied Poland and gave them homes + businesses seized from the Poles + Jews.
		Hitler did not really like the Germans living outside Germany, but saw these people as a good colonization material.
		
		THE WINTER WAR
			The Finns rejected the Sowjet ultimatum, leading to a Sowjet invasion.
			They claim that Finns attacked first.
			Finns were able to defend themselves through the winter.
			The Sowjets were very poorly prepared since their whole general staff was purged in the previous years.
			In March, the Sowjets were willing to accept Finnish calls for Peace since they believed that France and GBR could get involved in the war.
			But in the peace deals, the Sowjets demanded territory since they believed that the Finnish border was too close to Petrograd.
			Because the Finns resisted, they maintained their independence and democracy.
				Baltic states were authoritarian regimes, so there were fewer people involved in the decision making cycle, so it was easier for them to accept it
				As Finland was parliamentary republic, they had many decision makers to refer to.
			
	German invasion of France ended within days after they went over the low countries.
	Immediately after that, Germans issued ultimatums on Baltic states to drive the Sowjet miltiary bases away.
	Later, Sowjets pressured the Baltic states to sign agreements with them.
		The local leaders had to accept Sowjet demands on what their political structures should look like
		New elections were also held in just a few weeks
		Only the working people's union was an available option on the elections.
		After these parties won, they declared that they would join the USSR. They become the 14th, 15th and 16th republics in the USSR.
		
		
		
		
		
		
	In Europe, there were two parties:
		Revisionist powers
			-The powers which objected to the agreements + rulings of the WWI peace treaties.
			Losers of the WWI.
			Lithuania (Winners favoured Poland)
		Status-quo powers
			-Supporters of the post-war agreements
			Winners of the WWI.
			Estonia
			Latvia