HIS331 Lecture 10 (22 Nov 2017)

Sowjet Era in 1980's onwards
-------------------------------
There were many intellectuals in Estonia (+ rest of UdSSR) who were opressed or sent to gulags
	(Example: A. Sakharov & E. Tarto)
	Many of them were also nationalists, which was a crime on its own
	The intellectuals met in private to discuss the situation in their countries, but the gov't didn't want them to do that
	Many intellectuals also smuggled themselves out of the country.
	Very few of these people were actually dissidents.
		But after the collapse, many people called themselves dissidents
	A typical job that an intellectual like E. Tarto would work in would be isolated jobs with no chance of advancement, like night shifts in a collective farm.
	Most Sowjet citizens did not regard these people as heroes, but rather thought that these people were idealists working for an utopic cause, so they were disregarded.
		Some of these intellectuals became high-profile people in the society after independence, but their careers were short lived.
	After the fall of the UdSSR, people called their cause to be like a raddish: red on the outside but white inside.
	Many documents were circulated by the dissidents at the time, some were taken out of the country.
		They aimed to signal to the rest of the world that what the Sowjets said about their countries (Republics) were not neccessarily true.
	
	The leader of the first protest against the communist system in Poland (1980's) was a short-term president of Poland, leader of the workers solidarity union.
		The Sowjets said it was now the working class unionists (the backbone of their regime) were protesting.
		This effects of this protest were felt in the neighbouring Baltic states.
		
Biggest changes come when Gorbachev takes power.
	He's a young leader, in his 50's (his predecessors were in the 80's)
	He came up with policies to modernize the Sowjetunion and the Cold War. 
		Two big policies:
			Perestroika (Restructuring)
			Glasnost (Openness)
				Particularly notable.
				Other states immediately implemented this policy too.
				Gorbachev was aware that the UdSSR was falling behind in the arms race, but they were also far behind in the consumer front
				Oil and gas prices were also falling, and their economy depended on that.
				He figured that in order to have some more influence in this course, he went back to the roots of the revolution, revisiting some policies implemented by Lenin.
				-Getting people to openly criticize the system
				Gorbachev was not aware that this system could not be fixed. The system could barely sustain itself and could not tolerate tinkering.
				He also didn't know that all republics in the union had their grievances and knew that they were unfairly treated.
				For his policies, he relied on mutual trust and deals with the Western powers
					In order for thse policies to work, he had to implement the Glasnost. Nobody knew what the reality of the country's situation was.
				
				First joint ventures were formed between the UdSSR and the Western powers
					As usual, first establishments started in the Baltic provinces.
					These states were smaller and more advanced, so it would be easier to start these reforms there and contain them if they got out of hand.
					But these people held on to the idea that following Glasnost was also criticizing the policies of Stalin.
					-People were cautiously testing the limits of the system
					New facts about the WW2, oppression, Sowjet rule were published.
						Those who made the release expected outrage, but that didn't happen.
						The releases started as innocent remarks, but they became more extreme as the readers wanted outrage without alerting the authorities.
				First protests against the Sowjet regime were environmental protests. Because they were not political in nature, they were not stopped immediately.
					Started in Latvia against a series of huge Sowjet industrial development projects
						Also againt a hydroelectric project
					Estonia: Against a mining project
					Lithuania: Against an expansion to the nuclear power plant
					
					These environmental issues were not political, but the people in individual republics saw this as the central government neglecting the well-being of their citizens. 
				
					--> When these protests weren't stopped, other people became bolder to start larger protests
						These protests became more political in nature.
						In 1986-87, the dissidents raised the size of their protests, common people joined them.		
				
	He also had issues increasing his unpopularity.
		His first big reform was to reduce alcoholism in the UdSSR. He restricted the production and sales of alcohol drastically.
			His analysis to the problem was correct, but his implementation nearly undermined his authority.
			
The biggest gathering of the time happened during the June 1988 song festival, as a spontaneous meeting.
	A huge crowd gathered in there for a whole week.
	Gorbachev dismissed the old guard, who wanted to bring in the tanks to the protests. They were replaced by Gorbachev's reformist allies
		--> *** The old guard (opposing his policies) in almost all republics were dismissed and replaced by reformists. ***
	The Estonian national colours (banned) were also openly displayed at the time.
		This action spread to the other republics as well.
	Gorbachev wasn't initially against these protests & national movements.
		He did not immediately try to put an end to these.
		The Estonian Popular Front in Support of Perestroika: The first big civil movement which frames itself as a supporting organization to Gorbachev's reforms
		Because he seemed to support these movements, the EPFiSoP continued their actions
		The Kremlin advisors warned that these movements could lead to the dissolution of the UdSSR.
		
Poltical system changes:
	Gorbachev wanted to expand his own powers by amending the constitution.
		He wanted to avoid the interference from the old guard
		He also dropped the clause that allowed republics to secede
		The Estonians, led by one of Gorbachev's former allies, led a protest against these movements
			They said that the Sowjet legislation was clearly against that of the Republic.
			Sowjets immediately discredited this and saw that it was dangerous and contagious. Protests started appearing in all republics.
		Soon, even the Russian Supreme Sowjet joined the bandwagon. This led to the complete undermining of the system.
	At the time, nobody knew the true meaning of sovereignty. They just responded to Gorbachev's power grab.
	Anatoly Sypchak (?) was the governor of Leningrad. He was influential in renaming the city to Sankt Peterburg.
	
	--> Gorbachev had to appease all sides in his regime. He couldn't achieve that
		He is highly unpopular because he led to economic political collapse
		He is also supported because of the diplomatic links he established with the West
	Critics said that the Sowjets should have followed the Chinese ways of dealing with the political changes: Ending freedom of speech, keeping the communist party in power.
	
	Gorbachev also proposed free elections in a new cabinet. Representatives from all republics met in Moscow.
		He wanted to move forward with his reforms
		These meetings were televised
		In these meetings, the Balts wanted to start an investigation on the secret treaties between the Nazis and Sowjets.
			Gorbachev + Sowjets rejected these claims.
			There was strong opposition from government sources.
		In christmas 1989, the committee condemned the Nazi-Sowjet pact. The opponents were clear that this undermined the Sowjet system.
	General elections happened in 1990.
		Baltic states were now controlled by the Popular Front. They renamed their counries, removed communist emblems. DEclared movement towards independence.
		Latvia and Estonia were cautious, but Lithuania moved towards independence fast.
			Russians cut the gas supply to Lithuania in response.
			After 3 months of discussions, the Lithuanians declared that they postponed to delay their independence movements. Economic sanctions were suspended, but the Sowjets refused to enter any further talks.
		The advantage that the Baltic states had (compared to Catalonia) was the suppport they had from the West.
			Western powers did not recognize Sowjet annexation of Baltic states
			But Gorbachev wanted to end the Cold War, but the Baltic states would have to wait longer
		In December 1989, the Lithuanian communist party declared that they were cutting all ties they had with the other communist parties
			Their argument was that the people had lost complete faith with the communist party.
			This is the main reason behind this party's return in 1990's (after independence). They were active in the county's independence (but the communist parties were not entirely behind independence in Estonia and Latvia)
	
August 1989 , The Baltic Chain:
	Nearly 2 million people joined hands from Talinn to Riga to Wilna.
	On the anniversary of August 22 treaty between Sowjets and Nazis.
	The Sowjet media reported these events as a few extremists/fascists were acting alone, did not represent the will of the people at all.
	
	--> The message that the Baltic people wanted their freedom could no longer be contained.
	
In Estonia and Latvia, the International Front rose against the Popular Front
	They started as a counter-movement. They opposed Gorbachev and were backed by Gorbachev's opponents (old guards + KGB)
	They were called the International Movements because they were against the national movements and said that their ideas did not know any borders
		But these people were monolingual. They supported Russian (popular front was bilingual)
		
By early 1991, Gorbachev sided with the hardliners (in the background).
	In january 1991, special (and conventional) forces were sent to Lithuania and Latvia.
	The special forces moved to a television tower in Lithuania to stop their independence broadcasts
	But the civilians around the tower tried to stop the movement. 
	
	At the same time in 1991:
		The Gulf War.
		World focused on the US invasion of Iraq.
		The hardliners took this as their chance to crush the independence movements.
			But they acted too early. The gulf war was just starting
			CNN was also active in the region.
		Yeltsin (elected president) went to Talinn to sign a resolution between the countries
			Also ordered troops to not fire on people
			Knew that his political future depended on the military crackdown not being successful.
		
		Meeting between the leaders of independence movements
			Landsbergis - Lithuanian leader
			Also the others.
			
			The Baltic identity grew stronger after this meeting
			New Baltic committees were established. Promoted cooperation between the political systems of these 3 countries.
	
	There were independence referenda in the Baltic states. This was not their call. Gorbachev called to sort the issues in the republics before coming to a conclusion.
		But they were not made to actually reach independence immediately, but to delay the process for up to a decade.
		The independence movements (fundamentalist/purist nationalists) were not behind this movement. They also refused to negotiate with the communist party and the outsiders.
			Besides, they argued that the occupation was illegal, so they did not see the need to hold a referendum.
		The the popular front did not like the end results, but believed that this could help their case towards independence. 
		The referenda pass with majority in all 3 republics.
		
In 1991, the hardliners occupied the parliament.
	They wanted to depose Gorbachev.
	They were defeated in a few days, mainly because of Yeltsin's actions
	The Baltic states use this as their chance to declare independence.
		
Difference between the Baltic States and the rest:
	Almost all other republics and communist states changed their regime in a few months.
	The other places also had their communist regimes, so it was easier to just change the regime
	When it became clear that the UdSSR would not intervene in the domestic issues of other countries, civil protests toppled the regimes.
	But the Baltic states were always under Sowjet control, so it took them many years to succeed.
		
1985: Gorbachev takes power
1976: First minor protests
1987: Major protests
1988: Singing festival issues
1989: Baltic chain
	  Collapse of the Berlin Wall.
1990: Elections
1991: Lithuania becames the first republic to declare movement towards independence.
	  Failed coup attempt in Russia
	  Baltic states declare independence