HIS331 Lecture 11 (29 Nov 2017)

- Restoration of Independence (Politics, Gov't, Institutions set up after indep.)
- Economic Developments (Privatization / Liberalization)
- Societal Transition (Of the Russian speaking minority, mainly)
-------------------------------
***** FINAL INFO
	10 Short answer questions, in the period after the midterm
	2 short essay questions?
	1 broad topic essay.
-------------------------------

After the putsch in August 1991.
	Gorbachev proposed a new system, increasing autonomy in republics to prevent independence.
	In the chaos, Lithuania reaffirmed its declaration of independence.
	Estonia and Latvia declared that their transition to independence process was complete.
	The Western nations did not recognize USSR's annextaion of Baltic states
		This was not useful earlier.
		But in 1991, it helped the 3 states gain recognition and resume diplomatic ties.
	After independence, the people resettled in the Baltic had to apply for citizenship instead of immediately becoming one.

	One of the main reasons why USSR collapsed was their economic instability.
		People had to ensure their survival. Paying bills were everyone's main concerns.
		One of the main arguments for independence was the countries' hopes of improving their economies, getting out of the sinking boat.
		The first attempts of economic autonomy came in 1987, by economists proposing economical independence --> immediately shot down by Russians.
			These were results of Gorbachev's calls for people to contribute to the reforms.
			In that proposal, there was also mention of countries having their own currencies.
				At that time, the Russian Ruble was in use
				In the transition period, Ruble was still in use (eg. Latvian Ruble)
				Estonians were the first post-Soviet republic to cme up with their own currency, the Estonian Kron. (Introduced by the first prime minister, who knew nothing about economy)
		Unlike the first period of independence (in 1920's), Sweden and Finland provided economic assistance and advisors to Baltic states.
			There was also a division of support, the Scandinavian countries coordinated their support to countries.
				Finland --> Estonia
				Sweden --> Latvia
				Denmark --> Lithuania
				
Economic Changes:
	First currencies:
		Estonian Kron:
			A continuation of the Baltic tradition of using Kron as currency
		Lithuanian Litas:
			Their old currency
		Latvian Lat
	All currencies were replaced by Euro
	Economic Reforms:
		- Estonia had massive gold reserves in Britain before WW2. They surrendered the gold to the Soviets despite their nonrecognition. The Brits compensated the Estonians for this.
		- Most governments and advisors gave advice to Baltic states, but they decided to not take any advice and went with their own (radical) reforms.
			One of these reforms was introducing their own currency. This was an imitation of the 1948 BRD monetary reform.
			Nobody outside supported the currency reforms, arguing that it would destabilize the economy
			Estonia implemented the reform immediately, others did it in a less drastic fashion and took over a year.
			Their currency was also pegged (not freely floating) until Euro was adapted.
				--> This made it harder for their  central banks to respond to financial crises
	Privatization:
		Each post-Soviet country had their own method of privatization.
		Estonia led the efforts in early 1990's.
		A major question was the state-owned infrastructure (power, telecommunications, transportation, ...)
			This was the most controversial area.
			People with connections to a political party would lobby in their own favour
			But there were government decisions which backfired
				- Lithuanian government sold the only refinery in the Baltic states to Americans to prevent it from falling into Russian hands, but the Americans sold it to Russians.
				- Railways were also privatized, but the government decided to nationalize it 5 years later.
		The old communists became the biggest capitalists. They had the inside connections and the knowledge of the field.
			For a low cost, they became owners of major enterprises. Most of these enterprises went bankrupt, but their owners sold them early on. These were purchased by Scandinavian countries
		Before the fall of the USSR, homes were state-owned. Almost nobody owned their homes.
			People who lived in soviet-era apartment blocks became the owners of their units.
				But the owners did not have the means of renovating their units. Most were forced to sell their units to real estate sharks.
			Pre-soviet buildings were tricky to handle. The property rights were passed to the descendants of older owners, but the current residents also had the right to ownership. 
				These cases were dragged in court for many years.
				Some people used their connections or knowledge of legal system to gain ownership of the properties.
	Liberalization:
		Tariff barriers were mostly lifted in Estonia. They became the leaders of free trade.
		The Baltic states were trying to attract investment since they had little exports.
			They became subcontractors for big Scandinavian companies
		A lucrative resource was oil. Oil was sent to Baltic states over rail and were sold by middle men in these counries.
			Many people became very rich from this trade.
		Scrapping old Soviet infrastructure was also profitable. Organized crime became common as people took over old Soviet infrastructure and machinery and sold them to the West.
			Organized crime also interfered with local businesses, usually taking a cut of income of businesses.
			Compared to the rest of post-Soviet countries, the Baltic states were more calm in this issue.
	Eurozone:
		After joining the Eurozone, foreign investments increased.
		Research networks were established, started bringing money to the academia.
			
	2008 financial crisis:
		Scandinavian banks moved in and offered cheap credit and people wanted access to luxury, so they borrowed.
			People started living over their means. They expected the economy to get better and didn't see the need to save.
			There was also a boom in the construction sector.
			The bubble burst just before the global financial crisis. Latvia was hit hardest by this, became the first to get an IMF loan in this period.
		There were calls for Latvia to devalue their currency but they resisted. The neighbours were concerned since foreign investment was reduced because of this.
			But Latvia was much worse than the other 2, since their biggest bank was involved in a massive money laundering scheme and needed a bailout. When the government did, their economy collapsed
		Estonians later offered Latvia a loan (out of solidarity), but was mainly trying to demonstrate their stability.
		--> Latvia became Europe's poster child for austerity. They cut all spending by 20%
			Their currency was devalued. Mortgage crisis became much larger.
			Their drop in GDP was roughly 19%
				For reference, Estonian drop was 14%
		--> Conclusion: Economy recovered, austerity was successful. Even though austerity was considered a political suicide, it was implemented professionally and the government was reelected.
		In the financial crisis, every department in the countries got hit equally. All departments got an equal spending cut, so nobody believed that they were put at a disadvantage, so they beared their responsibility.
		
Political Changes:
	After restoring independence, the countries had some political and legal issues until they restored their constitution and legal systems. (Were using the Soviet system before)
		Estonia:
			Led the efforts. Mainly because of their luck of having a young reformist historian
			They took a different path, drafted an entirely new constitution
			President required a 2/3 majority in the parliament to be elected (moved on to electoral college after 3 failed attempts)
				Symbolic presidency, modeled after the German system
			Proportional representation
			Decided to not allow any referenda (mainly because of the use of it in 1930's)
		Latvia:
			Conservative.
			They put the 1920 constitution back into force and amended it to modernize it
			President elected by the parliament
			Proportional representation
			Allowed national referenda (LAT + LIT used a few referenda since independence.)
				Mainly initiated by citizens, by collecting 10% of the electorate signatures
				Most referenda failed in the Latvian case, which require 50% turnout
				Most recent referendum was in 2012, by the Russian minority to establish Russian as a secondary official language - Shot down
		Lithuania:
			Their efforts generally followed the Estonian reforms, but they were the only country to reelect the communist party back into power.
				The main reason behind the reelection was their divergence from Moscow.
				The communst party was mostly local Lithuanians (russians were common in the other countries' communist parties)
				The Lithuanian communists also stayed in power while the others (EST, LAT) knew when their time was up and became capitalists.
			Lithuanian Supreme Council adapted a new constitution in late 1992.
			Lithuanians decided to not give too much power to the president, but held a public election to choose the president
			A mixed system (half the seats allocated by proportional representation, other half by "first past the post" system)
			Allowed national referenda (LAT + LIT used a few referenda since independence.)
				Mainly initiated by citizens, by collecting 10% of the electorate signatures
				Most referenda failed by low turnout.
	Estonia and Latvia only had centre-right coalition governments, but Lithuania was more stable.
		Lithuania had two major parties: Social Democrats (communists) (92-96, 04-recently) , Homeland Union (conservatives) (96-04, recently-present)
		Even though parties had their policies determined, voters still voted for people, not parties. That's why in the volatile political environment in Latvia saw politicians outliving their parties.
				
	
	
	
	
	
-------------------------------
1988: 	Early independence
1991: 	Independence
1993: 	Economic instability after independence
1998: 	Economic reforms successful
1999: 	Russian and Asian economic crisis. Baltic states affected
2004: 	Joined the eurozone
		Became a focus point of foreign investment
2007: 	Massive GDP growth. Among the highest growth rates in the world
2008: 	Wall street crash.
		Baltic states were already suffering from their own economic crises.
2009: 	The Baltic states recovered from the economic collapse, returned to 5% growth.