HIS331 Lecture 2 (20 Sep 2017)

Baltic States Before WW1
-------------------------------

Following the Lithuanian rebellions, Lithuanian publication in Latin alphabet was prohibited.
	Many Lithuanians smuggled texts across the Prussian border.
	Nearly 3000 Lithuanians were punished for this illegal activity.
	
Lithuanian "National Awakening"
	Miroslav Hroch's 3 phases in nation creation: 
		Phase A:
			Saving Lithuanian culture and literature before it disappears.
		Phase B:
			First generation of national activists who try consciously to light the national spark.
			Spreading the idea that one does not only belong to a region, but to a nationality
		Phase C:
			These activists are successful, the idea is spread and accepted by the community.
			Forms a mass movement
	Gabriel Merkel's book on Latvian philosophy?
		Latvian peasant being met with a german monk and a knight, showing that the Germanziation was taken by fire and force. Taking the rights of local peoples.
		Took part in Phase B in latvian national thoughts.
		Talking about a golden age before the crusaders arrived, everything being taken away.
		There was also "a new dawn after 700 years of slavery".
		
	National epics & Culture:
		A finnish epic created from the Karelian lore.
			There is a concept that there were historic nations with kingdoms in the past. Most people in Eastern Europe did not belong to this.
			There was an interest in creating national epics in East Europe. Finns were the first ones to make this.
		Kalevipoeg - One of the first Estonian national epics in 1850's. Friedrich R. Kreutzwaldi
			(Estonians still have Germanic names in this era since surnames were assigned by German bureacrats.)
			+ Also Jakob Hurt
		--> Finn + Estonian epics were collections from traditional culture.
		The Bear Slayer, Latvian national epic
			This was made as a political move. The bear that they were hunting was a reference to a black knight (Germans).
			In 1877 a Baltic German critic wrote that the Latvians never achieved a level of civilization worth praising. This was a response.
		The Lithuanians didn't have to refer to their ancient past. They recalled the sons of the Grand Dukes when the pagan empire stretched from Baltic to Black Sea.
			With the national movements, the names of historic figures became very popular.
			Sure, there was a lot of invention and construction of national identity, but they had a solid history to refer to.
	
	Before the local press started addressing the people as Estonians or Latvians, they simply called themselves as the rural folk, or Livonians.
		Newspaper: Sakala.
	Song festivals became very common and popular in the region. New groups and bands were established.
		They were rebranded in the Soviet period as celebrating the building of the Soviet Union.
		Started in 1860's, but they didn't start as nationalistic manifestations.
			They first started playing music praising the tsar and the religion
			Nationalist influence increased in proportion later.
		These music festivals were imitations of small music festivals of Baltic German people, which was in turn an imitation of the music festivals in Germany.
			--> To show that they could do this too.
			But at the same time, they were trying to stress that they were different.
	
	Jakob Hurt
		An important figure in Estonian national movement.
		First Estonian to get a Ph.D.
		In the political alignments at that time, the division was only Germanophile or Russophile. These people were neither of those.
		They only wanted allies among the power holders (German nobles or Russian noble families).
			Jakob Hurt could be called a Germanophile because he argued that the people in Baltic provinces should cooperate more with the local Baltic Germans.
	Jakobsen
		Started the newspaper Sakala
		Eagerly sought the support of the imperial families in St. Peterburg against the German nobles.
		His main aim was to weaken the influence of German Nobles who were oppressing the Estonian people.
		Also to bring Russian laws an policies to the region.
	Valdemaaris
		The Baltic German universities and institutions censored his publications
		Started the first covertly political Latvian newspaper in St. Peterburg
	___
		Patriarch of the Lithuanian national awakening
		Studied in the University of Moscow, spent most of his life in Sofia.
		Emigrated to the US. Influential in the lithuanian culture movements (newspapers, plays etc.) in USA.
		Was involved in seeking the support of Russian nobles
			The increasing Russian influence was labelled as Russification by local Germans who were losing their influence.
			--> Enforcing the Russian culture, language, cuisine, religion
	
	The new Russian movement of imperialism replaced the policy of cooperating with local governors with the policy of active involvement
		The fact that there was a German nation was also effective in this
		And there was a new movement of pan-slavism.
		The Tartu University became a Russian language university (was a German language university before.)
		State involvement new in religious policies; new churches were built.
		The Peter statue was erected by the Baltic Germans to mark the 200th anniversary of Russian conquest of the region.
			--> to remind the current tsar that his ancestor signed a contract with the Germans when he conquered these lands.
			Melted down by the following regimes to erase this influence.
		In the Finnish case, Russification was present and was heavily criticised.
			--> depicted as the Russian two-headed eagle tearing the Finnish laws apart, violating the constitutional principles that were put in place earlier.
		The administrative changes in the region was welcomed by the Estonians and Latvians.
			Standardizing the rules and administration throughout the empire.
			Removed the feudal remnants, privileges.
			Before then, the small cities were ruled since the middle ages by a few families who controlled the politics in the city.
			With Russian involvement, the Latvians and Estonians started participating in politics 
			In Reval, the ethnic Estonian and Russian coalition took over the Baltic German local government.
	
	In addition to the political-cultural changes there is increased urbanization and expansion of railways.
		All railways connect to the capital
		Many peasants start moving to cities
		The small cities which were dominated by Baltic Germans was now overtaken by the majority populations.
		Innovations and new cultural movements arriving from the west, mainly entering through Riga.
			New inventions such as automobiles, bicycles
			The city was torn down and planned again, with more space for parks, districts.
			New architectural and art movements.
	In the end of the 19th century, there was a new wave of movement from Baltic states to the US and to a lesse degree, Canada.
		About 250,000 Lithuanians moved.
		There were many Lithuanian Jews (Litvaks) who moved west. Many of them were scientists and artists.
		
		Estonians and Latvians had a completely different movement patterns.
			The eastern lands were ready for colonization, people settled there.
			They settled in Crimea to colonize the region
			They also moved to Abkhazia.
			The Baltic Dream = Owning a family farm
				Going east offered people an easy option to achieve this dream.
				Estonians and Latvians were trusted by the Russian authorities (Since they weren't catholics like Lithuanians and Poles)
	
20th century:
	The world was rapidly modernizing but the authoritarian political system never changed.
	
	The 1905 Revolution:
		Did not get much global attention, but was very important for the Baltics
		The Baltics was where the revolution was most intense.
		Started after the Russo-Japanese war. The Russian navy went all the way to Japan only to be sunk by them. A great humiliation for a European power.
		The last major defeat in Russia was the Crimean War. People expected reforms, but very few reforms were implemented.
		Everything began when a peaceful protest in St. Peterburg was mowed down by Tsarist troops. Similar protests happen in Baltic cities and are ended by troops.
		This is the first time the Latvian, Estonian, Lithuanian people are mobilized.
			Socialism is a new political current in this region. "New Current"
		Baltic German manor houses are pillaged and torched by local workers. Extremist ideas spreading.
			People were oppressed both because of their nationality and their social status.
			Baltic Germans called the Tsarist troops to restore order.
		It was most intense in Latvia that some coined this as the Latvian Revolution.
		People sought to bring an end to the Baltic German domination of the region. Also to Russification.
		People also wanted an end to the land problem (where many people did not have land).
		They also wanted their languages to be recognized by the Russians.
		There were also stories of Latvians robbing banks in the UK to fund the revolution.
		Nicholas established the Duma. Representatives from all territories met in the first Duma.
			People from many ethnicities and religions met for the first time.
			But in 1907, the authorities refashioned the Duma and the subsequent elections to the Duma would not be the majority of their regions, but representatives of the land owners.
			Failed to respond to the need for a land reform.
		
	WWI:
		Is experienced in the Baltic region, very differently in the 3 nations.
		The Germans were very successful in East Europe. Even when they capitulated in 1918 they controlled large amounts of land in the region.
		By the end of the 1st year of the war, the Germans pushed the Russians into Russia. 
			For most of the war, Lithuania was under German control.
			Unlike Lithuania, Estonia was captured only during the last year of the war
			But since the frontline was on Latvian territory, Latvia was devastated.
				Thousands of people were displaced and moved further into Russian Empire.
				Russians forcibly evacuated most people from Latvia. Especially the Jews since they were symphatetic to the Germans.
		Latvians were actively conscripted to the army.
			The Russians almost never had any military regiments with any ethnic majority.
			But the Latvians had majority in many units since they were fighting to defend their homeland.
			The same riflemen pushed back the Bolsheviks and became very prominent in the region after that.
		
	1917:
		Some Estonians and Latvians wanted a nation state. Others wanted more social equality (socialism).
		