HIS331 Lecture 4 (4 Oct 2017)

Baltic States in Interwar Period - I
-------------------------------
Many parties were involved in the fight
	Railroads were strategically important since they provided access to the rest of the country
		Armoured trains
		Railroad junctions important
	Germans also important.
		->German Freikorps
			Mainly consisted of the people who could not go back to civilian life after the war
			Or those who need ideological cause
			- Also because German military was very limited as a result of the war.
		They believed that restoring the tsar would help Germany restore their monarch, Russia would also be a strategic ally.
	One of the most important battles happened in Northern Latvia.
		Germans pushing the reds north, Estonians doing the same in the opposite direction. They meet near Riga and refuse to let the other pass.
		Estonians win.
		German nationals are also divided. Those in Latvia supported the monarchy, those in Estonia did not.
			Germans themselves were also divided. After the revolution and abolishment of monarchy, many ideologies rose.
			The German regular army was demobilized, people returned home. The Freikorps which replaced them didn't see eye to eye with the new government
	
	Whites (Under Yudenich) prepared a campaign on Petrograd.
		They were supported by the Estonians and they reached Petrograd in October 1919
		The Whites were pushed back to Estonia. Estonia declared that they were neutral, disarmed the Whites.
		The aims of all parties involved were different.
		Britain promised that if Estonia participated in this campaign, their statehood would be recognized internationally.
	At the same time, another group makes a push from Latvia.
		They are led by a tsarist count, Bermondt
		Russian White corps. They were fighting the Germans a few months ago, but now commanding German Freikorps.
			Some of these soldiers were prisoners in the war.
		Their volunteers attack the Latvian national government.
			--> Also shown in the 2007 movie Defenders of Riga.
				("Names on Marble" --> 2005 Estonian film on a similar topic)
			The two main enemies, Russians and Germans, unite against the Latvians.
	
	While all of these were happening, there were calls for peace in Baltic states
		The first treaty that was signed with the Soviet Russia was the peace treaty with Estonia
			These nations were the first to recognize each other.
		Estonians signed this treaty against the wishes of their western allies.
			Allies: "Establishing their own country rather than participating in the fight against the Bolsheviks"
			Bolsheviks: "A defeat. The only european nation that did not blockade Russia." They used Estonia to sell Tsar's treasures to fund their war efforts.
			Estonians got an advantageous deal, getting paid in gold to sign this treaty.		
	
	The Russo-Polish war of 1920	
		The Poles who just established their independence still saw their country as the Polish commonwealth, which covered most of Western Russia.
		They invaded Ukraine, but were pushed back to Warsaw. Their defense stopped the Russian advance outside Warsaw. They pushed the Russians back to the borders of Belarus.
		They also took Vilnus, capital of Lithuania. This was one of the largest territorial problems in the post-WWI era. 
			The city was first seized by a mutinous commander. The poles denounced him.
				A plebiscite was held, people decided to remain in the "Central Lithuanian State"
			Lithuanians saw Vilnus as their historical capital and wanted to have it.
			Poles werethe majority of the population in the region, so they claimed it too.
			But since the Poles had a very strong military force, they got to keep the lands.
			A polish marshall (who became the dictator until 1935) saw that he could reestablish the Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth by taking the Vilnus area.
	
	The borders between the 3 nations were established very slowly. They could not agree.
		They got the help of the British and had them draw the borders.
		The Estonian general Leidener later took part in dividing the lands in midul east between the French and the British
		A concern was the town of Valka(Estonain)/Valga(Latvian), which was a major rail junction. It was devastating since there were no borders before
			Then reunited under Soviets in 1940
			Then divided in 1991
			Then reunited when they joined the EU & Schengen Zone
		There is also an island, Ruhnu off the coast of Latvia.
			There were Swedes on the island. They voted to join the Estonians.
			The Estonians convinced them by buying all their products and selling them Vodka. The Estonians also had close relations with the Swedes.
			
	It took more than a year for the international community to recognize these states.
		The Brits and the French gave up supporting the Whites and accepted them in 1921
			They delayed this because they still wanted to unite the White Russians and avoid creating multiple small states.
			The Balts were unsuccessful, they weren't accepted to the LoN for a long time
				-Georgia was accepted by majority, but they lasted only a few months.
				-The Poles were also accepted sooner since the French wanted to put more pressure on the Germans. This was another reason why Lithuania was not seen as a good option.
		The Americans recognized the Soviets in 1932.
			
	The Estonians and Latvians followed very similar methods in establishing their nations.
		Land Reform:
			Land was the issue which dominated all the political debate.
			This is also the cause which the local governments used to rally people against the Bolsheviks.
				-"Those who fight against the Bolsheviks will be rewarded with land"
				Bolsheviks also promised to take lands from the Aristocrats and distribute it to the land, but they required people to work on it communally
					--> A big mistake on the part of Bolsheviks
					--> Also supported the case of the national governments
				Those who fought with distinction were given bigger pieces of land.
			This matter was so pressing that the bureaucrats dealt with these issues first, even before declaring their constitution.
				Lands of aristocrats, churches, municipalities were collected and distributed to people.
					Aristocrats who lost their lands were allowed to keep some of their lands (This amount was doubled in Lithuania)
				A property owning class was created overnight in Baltic states.
			--> Politically this was critical to the success of these nations since it reduced the influence of Bolsheviks in the region. Bolsheviks were turned to a minority group in the 20's.
			The nobility of these nations petitioned the LoN, claiming that this was ethnic discrimination, but it was dismissed since it was a case of social justice.
				Most of these ethnic germans emigrated to Germany.
				Those who remained were still among the richest in their countries.
			This process is very egalitarian (compared to the rest of Europe)
				Previously, a few hundred families owned land in the country, but after that everyone had land
				The brits were angry, claimed that the Balts did not respect the right to own property.
				
		Constitution:
			All of these states wanted to change the existing system in the region. They witnessed all the neighbouring states and their revolutions.
				One of the counries that they were influenced from was Switzerland, which ran under direct democracy.
				- Single chamber parliament
				- 3 Year terms
				- Women were allowed to participate too (not done in the rest of Europe until 60-70's)
				- They did not have the position of president so that power would be in the hands of a legislative parliament
				
			The Estonian parliament was (and is) unique in the world for having an expressionist architecture
				This was also a national statement. The parliament was built at the old centre of power in Estonia, it had to be different from the old German architecture.
				The only way to express something unique, different from the previous regimes, was to follow the most modern, current, architectural movement.
				
		Political Systems:
			Estonia:
				Proportional representation --> harder to get majority alone. But the threshold was so low that most parties had a representative in the parliament
					Other nations such as Germany and Finland also suffered from this problem.
					At times there was up to 27 parties in the parliament.
					The authoritarian regime used this fragmented parliamentary system (by criticisizing) to gain power.
					Another cause of the fragmentation in the parliament was the presence of parties of ethnic minorities.
				Major parties:
					Far left: Communists (banned)
						They were banned, but they still had members in the parliament, reforming under a different name every time they were banned
					Left: Socialist workers party
						They were the largest party at first, but they declined over the following years
						This was the case since many of the people who supported Estonian independence were socialists
						They were behind the radical land reform
						But at the same time, they created a large land-owning group, which naturally became more conservative
					Right: Greens (agrarian party)
						They were the closest thing to a conservative party (Still not very conservative)
					Smaller centrist parties
						They had some influence in coalition building. This was important during the period of global depression
						The socialists were against the idea of coalition building, so the smaller parties constantly made coalitions with different parties
				The Germans were a small minority in the parliament, but they were rich and powerful. Since they were better organized, they were very influential
				The Russians, however, were very poor and disorganized, so they were mostly underrepresented.
				There was also a law of cultural autonomy
					Drafted by a Baltic German deputy, keeping the Baltic German minority in mind.
					Focused on individual autonomy rather than territorial autonomy
						Cultural autonomy treaties in the rest of Europe depended on territorial autonomy
						The Jews and Germans were also very urbanized. Since they weren't dominant anywhere, territorial autonomy would not work.
					This idea was first drafted by Austro-hungarian bureaucrats to handle the multicultural Habsburg empire better.
					Jews also established their cultural council (They had 4000 out of 3000 required)
					Some people in Estonia and Latvia tried to export this idea since there were German minorities everywhere (since many new states were established)
						Pan-European Council of Nationalities
						They argued that this model could be applied in the rest of Europe
			
			

	Latvians were strong supporters of Bolsheviks, probably more than the rest of Russia.
		They were living in poor conditions and their economy + politics was dominated by German aristocrats
		They wanted land, bolsheviks also promised them land
		They suffered the most from the war and devastation
		The Latvian riflemen were also well known and an important political factor
		Bolshevik promise unique: Land, Bread, *Peace*
		