NMC278 Lecture 6
June 1, 2017

State building in Turkey and Iran
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Republican People's Party / CHP (est. 1923)
	Democratic Party / DP (1946-60)
	Adnan Menderes (r. 1950-60)
	Turgut Özal (d. 1993)
	Reza Shah Pahlavi (r. 1941-79)
	Mohammad Mosaddiq (PM, 1951-53)
	The White Revolution
	Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeni (d. 1989)
-------------
Terke:
	State-building in Turkey after independence.
	Skilled non-muslim people left the country. State investment in education
	Single party period under Atatürk.
	Parliamentary opposition existed after independence, but the state-building efforts of CHP could not be challenge.
	Kemalist ideologies could not be challenged.
	Non-turkish nationalist movements (kurds) suppressed.
	
	Terke And the Kurds
		Kurds in northern Iraq succeeded in an independence referendum.
		By the time of Atatürk's death in 1938, state power was enforced across the country.
		As Atatürk began mobilizing the people against allied powers, he had to negotiate with kurdish chieftains in the region.
			They sought further autonomy, language recognition.
			Not willing to fight a war on another front, they accepted the demands of tribes that wanted autonomy. Statehood discussions were delayed.
			Kurdish separatist nationalist movements started emerging in 1920's, but they were dealt with before independence.
			The parliament agreed to allow some autonomy in kurdish southwest
				Regional kurdish parliament
				All kurdish demands to be approved by turkish government
				Kurdish language allowed, but the official language of schools, law, gov't be only turkish.
				Kurds opposed to this, but they had to reach an agreement.
		After 1923, central government picked positions to fill local offices. They left kurdish candidates on purpose.
			Turkish government avoided any mention of kurdish autonomy + independence.
			Kurdish military personnel were demoted.
			Kuridsh was banned from any state institution.
			Final blow came with the abolishment of the calpihate. This was the end of the proposed unitary state proposed during the war of independence
			Religious education institutions (the only option they had at the time) were also closed.
		Azadi (freedom) movement started. They were suppressed immediately as they were unorganized.
		Shaykh Said rebellion, sought to establish an independent Kurdistan.
			As a response, the state declared martial law in the region (for 2 months). New law allowing troops to remain in the region.
			People who were thought to be related to the Shaykhs were deported to western turkey.
				This was made to send the message that the state-building efforts could not be hindered.
		The presence of military officers encouraged further rebellions in 1926-27.
		After that time, kurds were not allowed to have any major positions in any institution.
		Intellectuals in exile did not try to influence people in Turkey, but rather sought to gain support from European nations for support to their independence.
		New ideas started spreading in 1927, arms started moving into the country from kurds in Iran. Khoybun/Xoybûn group established. This armed group was able to operate until 1930's.
			Both Turkey and Iran tried to suppress these kurds, but failed to eliminate separatism.
		Atatürk died in 1938, during this conflict.
			His ideas + rigid stance against kurds would be strongly guarded by the government + armed forces
		
	Terke after Atatürk
		İnönü was elected
			He knew that a war in europe was ineviatble.
				He maintained a policy of neutrality, but wanted to improve relations with european nations
				Maintained relations with Germany, expanded it to Italy.
					Non-aggression agreement with Germany in 1941, as axis invaded Mediterranean and Balkans.
				Also established diplomatic relations with France and Britain, got support in rebuilding military.
					France allowed Terke to annex Alexandretta to avoid conflict with them.
				Friendship pact with USSR still in effect. They also supported Terke against fascism.
					But later, Stalin demanded that Terke stop cooperating with France and Britain, and asked for control of Straits.
					Terke broke relations with USSR after that point.
			Pressured into entering the war in 1943, delayed it until the final weeks of the war.
				This earned them participation in the founding conference of the UN in california.

	Terke and the Cold War
		A serious question: how to balance the influence of foreign powers?
			Stalin was pressuring Terke to return territories in Northern Terke.
			Very close proximity to USSR and their expanding influence gave them a position as a buffer zone between USSR and the west.
			Truman received American military + economic support.
			Initiation of the Truman Doctrine
				Basically fills Britain's shoes in the region.
				Countries got major economic and military assistance to remain loyal to western powers.
			Turkish government agreed to pursue closer relations with the West.
				Joined the NATO, became full members by 1952
		Turkish industrial and economic circles wanted to participate more in the global economic activities
			The country's economy stil recovering in this period.
			Life standards still low
			Turkey joined the Marshall Plan
				--> US program for economic reconstruction + rescue of capitalism and market economies in Europe.
	
	Political Pluralism
		Agitation for the application of democratic principles came from individuals from the ruling party, mainly Adnan Menderes and Celal Bayar.
		The main cause of opposition was the land reform bill, which would distribute land to landless peasants.
		Growth of the Left. Opposition parties gained major support in the countryside, with the religious people who were unhappy with the government's secular reforms.
		When CHP won another closed vote by majority, they were accused of fraud. DP became the first real opposition party that got a position in the parliament
			DP would win the 1950 elections.
			
	The Democratic Party Rule
		Celal Bayar President, Adnan Menderes PM.
		They continued rapid mosque building after 1950
		This period of 10 years brought a major change to the country.
		Kurdish nationalism also grew in the country, especially after improvements in communication capabilities.
			More Kurds learned turkish and benefited from the state education systems.
			Also established radio programs that spread their ideas.
			They were also in contact with people in Iran and Iraq.
		Large-scale urban migration in this period
			Demographics of the cities rapidly changed
			Land became accumulating in the hands of land owners
			Kurds also moved to cities
		Economic changes:
			Area under cultivation doubled
			Number of tractors rose from 2000 to 42000
			Length of metalled roads rose from 2000 to 7000 km
			Further improvements in communications.
	
	Military coup of 1960
		Even with the economic growth, imports greatly exceeded exports
		Domestic prices rose
		DP passed a law that aimed to seize the properties of CHP members
		In the face of rising urban protests, the DP enacted further laws to stop oppositions.
			Press freedoms repealed.
			National arrest programs
		Greek nationalist attacks in Cyprus started attacks against greeks in terke.
			Greeks had to leave the country
		DP used the army to supporess CHP. Student and military cadets emerged.
			Because the military followed atatürk's legacy, they saw that the DP was abusing their power
			Army took control of the country for 11 months. Arrested all DP members of the parliament for endangering atatürk's reforms and views.
			
			This was also a sign that there was a part of the government that operated independently from the ruling government
				"Deep state"
				
	Politics afet 1960
		Although the government remained as background protectors of kemalist orders, political life would open up further
		CHP gradually defined itself as a left party
		Politics were dominated by 2 parties: CHP and AP (Justice Pary)
		Extraparliamentary groups also rose in this period
			PKK:
				Kurdish workers' party
				A marxist extremist party.
				Followed a conservative agenda, became the main supporters of kurdish independence
		
	Social and Economic Crisis:
		Increasing migration to towns led to unemployment
		Migrant worker agreements with Germany to tackle unemployment.
			Turkey sent workers to Germany to tackle the government's budget shortfalls
		AP adopted IMF auserity program in 1979
			Cut social spending
			Lower tariff barriers
			
			Because of this, there was expanded opposition to the government
		Military took control in 1980. Suppressed militant left and militant right. Imposed the IMF austerity package.
		
		After the 3-year military rule, ANAP (Motherland Pary) won the elections.
			Had members from the old parties + ultranationalist right.
			Turgut Özal was the president
				Terke opened up to the international economy
				Started an activist foreign policy near the end of the cold war
				Sought to define a more pluralistic vision of turkish society
				Represented a turkish civic identity that was more relaxed in its interventions
				Identified himself as a part of a Sufi order
				Kurdish movements became legal again.
			All the changes were a challenge to the kemalist legacy.
			Terke mostly withdrew from middle eastern politics.
			After end of cold war, Özal sought closer ties with turkish speaking countries
			After american invasion of Iraq, Özal started the "Iraq question". Supported expansion of turkish speakers in northern Iraq + got more involved in middle eastern affairs.
			Also sought admission into the EU. 
		
	In 1997, military pressure forced the resignation of the president of turkey's first islamist party
	In 2000's, the ruling AKP identified with legal reforms + reconciltion with the past differences in views. Growth of modern islamist view.
	After the end of the cold war, the ottoman legacy was reassessed. The era of ottoman reforms was viewed more favourably.
	
Iran:
	Reza Shah Pahlavi:
		Engaged large-scale insustrial and military growth in the country
		Extended road, rail, telephone, radio networks
		Most towns were connected to the electricity grid, many power plants built.
		Turkish reforms were mostly imitated with little delay.
			But one difference from the turkish reforms was the expansion of private industries in the era.
		Army, students, merchants benefited the most from these reforms
		Several tribal uprisings against the government in 1930's.
		All economic investment favoured large cities. Roughly 58% of investment.
		Britain was the biggest foreign trade partner in this era, especially with the expansion of the oil industry.
			Their presence was highly unpopular, mainly due to the concessions in oil production.
		Reza shah sought more support from Germany.
			Their trade relations grew larger. By the end of 1930's, they were the biggest trading partner
			Infrastructure was expanded, mining equipment provided
			Nazi influence grew in Iran. Nationalist views expanded.
			Iranese government protected german agents.
		When Germany invaded USSR, they wanted to use Iran as a base for their invasion. Allied powers wanted to counter this.
		Allied powers invaded Iran and exiled Reza Shah.
		Iran was divided again:
			USSR occupied the north
			UK occupied the south
			Cities were mostly left untouched.
			The powers declared that this occupation would be temporary.
			
	Muhammad Reza Shah
		Brough to power by the UK and USSR, so he had little power at first.
		With the removal of Reza Shah's autocracy, social freedoms and reforms continued.
		The pro-soviet marxist pary, "Tudeh" (masses) was established in 1941, affiliated unions formed by 1942-43.
			They had growing influence in the country.
			Their pro-soviet views did not harm their popularity.
			They gained further support in the north not only because of the soviet presence, but also because the minority-populated regions were also the economically advanced northern areas.
		Worker strikes and demonstrations under Tudeh leadership. A social revolution was growing.
		Free press also supported the party.
		American advisors were called into Iran in the country with the growing movements.
			Their intervention helped the monarchy survive in the era.
			The monarch also maintained his position as the supreme commander of the military, mainly because of the growing problems by unrest.
			
	American Influence in Iran
		With their extending rule in Iran, they challenged the british influence in the country. They were expanding due to the fears of Russian and British interventions.
		American advisors supported private enterprises.
		Popular anger among the masses towards the political institutions.
		American advisors sought to expand American powers in the Iranese economy + establish american air bases in Iran.
		The government also used US influence to build a larger military and to support the throne in the period of unrest.
			With their support, soviet troops were forced to withdraw from Iran.
			The autonomy of the occupied regions were ended.
	
	Mosaddiq and Oil
		After the end of WW2, Iranians started discussing the oil concessions again. They weren't happy with the concessions.
		Oil production profits grew larger, but the stipends went smaller over time.
			They paid only about 30% of revenues to Iran.
		Renegotiations between the government and the oil company started in 1947. The agreement reached in 1949 was highly unpopular. The parliament rejected it, but the shah accepted it.
		An opposition coalition was formed, centered around the idea of rejecting the oil agreement. The coalition was called the National Front.
			They voted to nationalize the country's oil industry.
		Britain led an international boycott to block Iranian oil exports. This damaged Iran's economy.
		The US initially supported the Iranian initiative, but later joined the boycott.
			They were hostile to unaligned 3rd world governments, and did not want the communists to gain further support in Iran.
			Because Mosaddiq did not ban communist parties, he was seen as a supporter of communism.
			They were also concerned that allowing Iran to nationalize their oil industries would also trigger the same movements in south america.
		US made agreements with Britain to have a share in the Iranian oil industry.
			They established campaigns in the country, declaring mosaddiq as a secret communist
			Sought to reduce his popularity in the country
			American secret agents spread these ideas in the country, bribed the policemen.
			In the end, the US efforts helped in overthrowing the mosaddiq government. They helped the Pahlavi family return.
		
	US-Pahlavi Alliance
		The shah banned the Tudeh party
		US supported Iran's economic growth
		Iran gave US control of 40% of oil fields
		Iran took a pro-western, anti-communist stance.
		US and Israel helped Iran establish secret police.
		Parliament existed, but genuine opposition parties were banned.
		During JFK's rule, Iran was forced to enact social changes to avoid "other Cubas"
			"White Revolution"
			Shah's reason: National front was getting stronger again. The shah started a mass arrest campaign, but knew that this wouldn't bring him more support.
				He wanted to portray himself as the representative of the people, starting a populist initiative.
	
	The White Revolution
		--> took place without violence.
		Major land reform
		De-nationaliztion of industries
		Women's suffrage
		Nationalization of forests
		Improvements in literacy in the country
		More powers to the workers
		
		As a result, many landlords' estates were redistributed to peasants.
		Iran's economy shifted towards a market economy system.
		
	After the revolution:
		Opposition to the shah grew after this revolution.
			Mainly by the Ulema
		Ayatollah Khomeni was the leading figure to this opposition.
			He had been a critic of the shah for a very long time.
			Opposition to the literacy corps, argued that it would undermine their religious authority.
			Arrested by the state, but released by agreeing to not get involved in politics.
		The opposition also criticised his ties to the US.
		The supporters of the opposition were also asked to boycott the parliamentary elections
		Khomeni was arrested and exiled due to his later political actions in the country. He would not return until 1979
		
		President Carter started supporting human rights, and the leaks of human rights violations in Iran weakend the shah' authority in the country.
		The shah had to allow some dissident in the country in order to not antagonize the US (their only supporters at the time).
		In 1978, the shah decided to permit no further liberalization in the country. Strong opposition started to grow in the country.
			Guerilla forces were also formed in the country. 
			Khomeni's religious network held political initiative to require further concessions by the shah.
			The people enforced their demand to reestablish the old constitution + end monarchy in the country.