NMC278 Lecture 4
May 25, 2017

World War I
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Armenian Incident
	McMahon-Hussein Correspondance (1915-16)
	Sykes-Picot Agreement (1916)
	Zionism
	Balfour Declaration (1917)
	Jamal Pasha ("the Blood Shedder") and the Ruling Triumvirate
	Sharif Hussein ibn-Ali and the Arab Revolt
	Amir Faysal
	Tle League of Nations + Mandate System
-------------
WWI & The Middle East
	Prior to WWI, europen countries depended on their colnial possessions. This included the middle east too.
		France depended on soldiers from TUN & ALG.
	Middle East had some of the highest losses of life per capita
		France --> 9-10%
		Ottomans --> ~25%, majority of them non-combatants
		Iran --> 100,000's perished due to famines during French and British blockades
	WWI is regarded as the single most important event in the modern history of middle east.
	Ottomans lost Egypt, Levant, Mesopotamia, Balkans, Caucasus
	Political Changes:
		Current State system + borders of midul east are shaped by WWI:
			Egypt became a British Satellite
			Iran became a centralized military dictatorship (ruled by a dynasty)
		Nationalism became more emphasized:
			Ottomanism ended, many nation states released
		Zionism gained British Support
			Oy vey
			Jews agitated by the support. Demand independence.
			
	Ottoman Goals & Ambitions:
		I&T were ruled by 3 Pashas at the time:
			Mehmet Talat Pasha
			Ahmet Cemal Pasha
			Ismail Enver Pasha
			
			These pashas are responsible for ottoman entry into WWI
			Also responsible for armenian incidents
			
		1914 German-Ottoman agreement:
			Signed because of German support in Balkan wars.
			Germans also supported the reformation and growth of ottoman army.
			Germans were also the rivals of Russia.
			Germany appeared to have no territorial ambitions in ottoman empire.
			Ottomans also wanted to retake the territories they lost in previous decades. They considered German support to be strong enough to retake the holy lands.
			
	France, Britain, Russia Goals & Ambitions
		Aimed to gain territories from the partition of the Ottoman Empire
		Sought to end the "Eastern Question" with this partition --> "Who will get which territory"
		Establishing and strengthening their political and economic influence in East MEditerranean
		GBR wanted to expand their influence in Arabian Peninsula.
		RUS wanted to gain control over Istanbul & Straits
			Expanded economic resources, influence
			Istanbul an important orthodox christian city. Pan-orthodox aims
		
	Persian Goals & Ambitions
		Declared neutrality during the war, but russia and GBR wanted to fully control their parts of Iran
		Revolution in Iran prevented this from happening.
		
	Non-state forces Goals & Ambitions
		Arabs sought self-government over Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan
		Armenians sought to absorb the territories where they were a majority.
		Greece:
			"Megali Idea" (Great Idea): Expanding the Greek state to coastal Anatolia, Balkans, Cyprus.
			Was divided between pro-british and pro-german factions.
		Zionist movement:
			Originated among the european jews.
				Started as their answer to the european nationalism.
			In order to evade anti-semitism, they either had to leave Europe, or be absorbed into European culture
			Especially important with Russian Jews.
				Russia embraced a pro slavic and eastern orthodox focus, jews were further alienated.
			Five options:
				Escape to USA
				Laying low, avoiding persecution
				Joining ideological revolutionaries, rebels.
				Seek further autonomy or national rights in Russia.
				Establish a jewish homeland outside of Russia and Yurop.
			Before the jewish settlement in Palestine, Palestine was 95% Christian and Muslim. It became majority-jewish after then.
				Zionist settlers in Palestine had constant clashes with local Palestineans, this conflict was mostly disregarded.
				With 2nd wave of Zionist settlement (1905), zionists were displacing arabs from the lands they settled, saw the arabs as economic threats. Arabs were alienated.
				Land purchasing became more explicitly political --> asserting dominance, gaining legitimacy over the land.
			Jews hoped that cooperation with the british would help them establish an international recognition of an independent jewish state.
				Jews had previously asked ottomans for recognition and support, but they were mostly ignored.
			
			
	Armenian Incident:
		1-1.5M armenians died under the CUP government.
		There was an armenian nationalist movement which claimed parts of eastern anatolia for a future Armenian nation
			They worked with russian support to create local armenian networks.
			This was seen as a threat to the ottoman war efforts.
		CUP ordered their units to deport armenions from region, starting a forced march across syria.
		Other armenian intellectuals were also deported.
		Survivors settled in Syria & Lebanon
		East Anatolia was largely cleansed of armenian presence.
		
		
	Allied Negotiations on Ottoman Lands
		Allied nations had secret discussions on how to divide the ottoman empire after the war.
		
		McMahon-Hussein Correspondance
			Exchange of letters between july 1915 - march 1916
			Between a british governor in Egypt, and Sharif Hussein ibn-Ali, guardian of the Hijaz.
			Hussein was not closely aligned with the CUP.
			Hussein proposed to support the British war effort against ottoman empire in return for British support for arab independence in the fertile crescent.
				British agreed to these basic terms, but both sides interpreted the territorial claims in a different way.
					Hussein aimed for a general levant + mesopotamia + peninsula arab state
					Britain had also agreed to share some of those lands with France.
				Hussein was a descendant of muhammad, so he could unite the local muslims.
				Ottomans had called for a jihad against europe, so the british believed that allying with Hussein would counter the ottoman sultan's call for jihad.
			This movement started mainly as a response to the ottoman aims of centralization in 1908 + against CUP and their policies.
			Started the Arab Revolt of 1916, supported by the British forces.
				Attacked supply lines.
				Cut the Hijaz rail lines
				Defeated the ottoman garrison of Medina.
				Joined the British forces, fought in Palestine.
				Occupied Damascus in 1918, set up Arab Kingdom.
				
		Sykes-Picot Agreement (1916)
			A re-negotiation of the negotiations of territorial claims.
			Would contradict previous negotiations.
				Negotiations between Britain, France, Russian diplomats
				Called for Russia to keep Germany under pressure
				Russian claims for straits + constantinople + armenia accepted by others
				Britain got direct administration over southern Iraq,
					Also indirect control over surrounding regions, expanding as far as Israel.
				France would get Lebanon + Southeast Anatolia
					Also agreed to have a sphere of influence covering North Iraq
				--> This agreement reaffirmed that counries could be compensated for their losses in war with territory.
				Palestine to maintain independence
					Mainly due to claims by multiple nations.
					Russians thought "Palestine" only covered Jerusalem
					Hussein also claimed Palestine, as it was an extension of greater syrian territories.
			British occupied some french claims
			After the revolution, Russia gave up all claims and revealed this agreement.
			
		The Balfour Declaration (November 1917)
			The only document made public right away.
			Signed by the British Government to Rothschilds, pledging Britain's support for creation of a pro-jewish territory.
			Didn't explicitly state a "Jewish homeland" in order to keep the land British.
			This also went against the McMahon-Hussein Correspondance + Sykes-Picot Agreement.
			As Britain saw itself in a stronger position than France, they were okay with claiming a previously neutral zone.
			British aims:
				If jews were outnumbered by chritians and muslims, they would be dependent on britain
				Britain overestimated the political power of jews in USA + Russia. They thought the jews in their countries would pressure their leaders to commit more to the war effort. (USA was anti-war at the time.)
					Their thought was wrong, but still had some effect in USA.
				Biblical romantism in british cabinet (return of jews to their holy lands)
			Britain gained great influence over the region after this declaration.
			
		Sharif Hussain's anger towards british actions
			Britain claimed that Sykes-Picot was ineffective and Balfour Declaration was only a sign of goodwill.
			Still thought he would get a good bargain after the war if he contributed well to the war effort.
				He knew that he wasn't in a good negitiating position against the British, but some favour from the british government was better than nothing.
				That never happened.
				
	League of Nations + Mandate System:
		Countries agreed to establish a LON, mainly to resolve territorial disputes.
		Sanctioned British + French territorial claims on Ottoman Empire + colonial Germany by establishing Mandate system:
			"People there are not able to govern themselves yet"
			"These lands will be entrusted to *Advanced* Nations, which will control their resources, manpower, infrastructure."
			Would provide administrative advice until they could exist unaided.
			Three stages of mandates: A, B and C
			Class A:
				Middle East was Class A ("Advanced stage")
					Mandates in Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq
			Class B: German territories in Africa (where?)
			Class C: German territories in Southwest Africa.
			--> This started the idea of future independent states in these mandates.
			
			Settlement over ottoman territories came in April 1920 (since peace treaty was not reached by then)
				Arab provinces were detached from the ottoman empire, split between french and british.
					France received a mandate over Syria + Lebanon
					Britain was given mandate over Palestine + Iraq.
				The arab claims were no longer accepted by the British, Arab nationalist forces were driven out by the French.
					Faisal and his family demanded compensation for the loss of their territorial claims.
					Britain created the mandate of Transjordan, gave it to his family.
					Faisal's family also became the rulers of the mandate of Iraq.
				Churchill: Accepted and announced that the borders (Transjordan, specifically) were created arbitrarily and hastily.
				
	Corresponding events in Iran:
		Government declared neutrality in the war.
		Iran was powerless + strategically important.
		Ottomans moved to Azerbaijan to 1914 to fight Britain and Russia.
		Germans started tribal revolts in south Iran against Russian + British occupation.
		At the time, Russia + Britain still controlled the country.
			Russia aimed to formally annex the territories it controlled.
				Qajar dynasty is placed under direct Russian rule.
				Qajars escape to Kurdish provinces, they fight the Russians, are supported by the Ottomans.
			Britain wanted to establish permanent control over south, mainly to control the oil fields found in the region.
			British wanted to establish an imperial system in Iraq, Iran, India/Burma.
		After the october revolution, russian control in northern iran evaporated quickly.
		Two national movements emerge.
			Both movements adopt policies that benefit the north, which was not under British rule.
			They sought Soviet support.
			A revolt was launched in 1917 in the caspian regions with the hope of establishing a socialist revolt.
				Many people were killed
				Farmlands were devastated
				Some regions came under the control of tribal chieftains
				Iran was hit was a famine in 1918, killed about ~25% of the population.
					Mainly caused by the western troops getting their food from local farmers
				British agreed to give the revolutionaries territory in the north, still under british mandate
					Mainly to keep the southern oil fields under british control
					Also to establish a buffer zone between oil fields + USSR.
		Treaty between britain and Iran:
			Britain gave large subsidies (bribes) to Iran
			established a british protectorate in Iran (not ratified, but british acted as if it was ratified)
			As the anti-imperialist views grew stronger, british control was decreased.