NMC278 Lecture 6
June 1, 2017

The Jewish Menace
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Theodor Herzi
	Zionism
	David Ben Gurion
	Hajj Amin al-Husayni
	The Jewish Agency
	The Palestinean Revolt / General Strike (1936-39)
	1937 Peel Commision / Partition Plan
	UN General Assembly Resolution 181
	al-Nakba/War of Independence (First Arab-Israeli War) (1947-49)
	Plan Dalet
	Deir Yassin
-------------
Background
	As stated before, zionist settlement started in early 1900's.
	They considered the land they settled to be empty, disregarding the arab population in the region.
	First started by farming cash crops, but saw that agriculture alone did not bring them the life standards they were used to have in Europe.
	New waves of jews enabled the zionists to expand their conquest to not only their land, but also labour market
		Romantic nationalism, thoughts. Belief that place in labour market had to be earned by helping in build the nation.
	The growing population was seen as a threat to arab population.
		Also supported by individuals with european background.
	Brits were the first patrons of the zionist movement. Zionists sought sovereignity, but britain would not allow that at the time.

Brtish Mandate of Palestine:
	There was no long-term planning for palestine.
	Reluctance to let arab palestineans to progress towards sovereignity.
	Syria also protested, it was historically ruled from Syrian cities.
		They were silenced after the colonization of Syria by France.
	Despite being a class A mandate, Palestine did not have the rights that the other mandates had.
		The zionist movement had guaranteed political powers, had direct influence over the high commissioner.
		Unlike other mandates, there was no palestinean parliament or any representatives to "tutor".
		In the terms of the mandate, Palestineans were never mentioned as an entity, but as "non-jews", or "native population".
		Palestineans had to agree to the terms of the mandate if they wanted any representation in the country, but they never got it.
	Protests and clashes in 1920-1921 <-- 10% jewish population ruling 90% arab population.
	Zionists asked for british protection until the zionist population could stand on their own
		Brits accepted this immediately, thinking that both sides would need British patronage to keep each other at bay.

	British policies were very hard to manage
		On one side, they supported european jewish settlements in Palestine
		On the other side, they had to guarantee the Arabs' rights in the region.
		
	Palestineans proposed representation acording to distribution of population
		This would mean minority jewish representation. They rejected this
		Jews proposed parity in administration
		--> A Palestinean-majority government never happened.
	
	At the time, Arab leadership was large land owners and urban notables from the ottoman era. They formed a policy of moderate opposition.
		Some of these families negotiated with the British, but they were mostly dealt with as individuals than as representatives.
		They established the Supreme Muslim Council and the position of "Grand Mufti" of Jerusalem (To oversee religious affairs.)
		Hajj Amin al-Husayni was given the title.
		This filled the vacuum in Palestinean administration.
		
	Hajj Amin al-Husayni
		Came from a wealthy backround, but was not well known.
		Was chosen by the British as a part of their "divide and rule" policy, trying to turn notable Arab families against each other.
			He and the Community still followed a moderate opposition policy.
		
1929: Year Zero?
	In ottoman time, Jews could pray at the western wall under Ottoman permission
		Brits decided to maintain status-quo.
		Zionit leadership insisted that jews should be able to pray at the wall by right and not by permission.
			They placed chairs at the wall permanenetly and defied the rule of praying by permission.
	By 1929, the religious tensions turned to riots.
		This conflict settlers vs. natives first, now it was a nationalist conflict between jews and Arabs.
	Royal commission recommended that GBR tighten restrictions on jewish immigration and land purchases
		Palestineans thought this was a chance for the jews + brits to see their mistakes.
		Zionists thought this was a threat to their enterprises
			They lobbied to have this policy reversed
			
	After this point, the arabs started losing ground in Palestinean politics.
		They did not have political connections to the british government while the zionists could change the empire's policies quickly.
		
Asymmetrical Development:
	Jewish community was allowed to develop their holdings at will, but the social and economic infrastructure of the arab natives was not developed.
	The palestinean peasants were hit the hardest, since their practices were left undeveloped and the jewish conquest of labour policy had greatly disadvantaged them.
		As a result, the jews successfully developed a parallel economy.
		They were better educated, they had further financial resources and more foreign support.
	In 1930's, with the rise of nazism, many more immigrants arrived in Palestine, the jewish minority rose to 25% of total population.
	The palestinean power eroded by 1934. The jewist bureacrats had seized all channels to power.
	Zionists believed that the arabs would have to resign to their ideals, but this was seen as an unrealistic idea.
		The jewish leadership became much bolder.
		David Ben Gurion became the first prime minister.
			He defended that rather than resigning to British will, they would have to unite and resist against the foreign influence and arabs.
			They started to stockpile more arms.
			
Beginnings of the Arab Revolt (1936) + The Peel Commission
	In 1936, Clashes broke out between Arab peasants and the British troops.
	The Peel Commission suggested that a three-way partition was necessary
		An arab territory to be transferred to transjordan
		A jewish state
		A (palestinean majority) state to be left under direct british rule.
	The zionists saw this as an opportunity to legitimize their independence. Arabs saw this as a threat, as they were a majority.
	British bureaucrats believed that the arab population should be evicted to transjordan, otherwise it would be a jewish state with arab majority.
		This legitimized deppulation + ethnic cleansing in the minds of zionist leadership.
	The partition recommendation turned to a full-blown revolt. British troops were sent to Palestine.
		British army used zionist auxillaries to supporess the revolt.
		GBR arrested/exiled leading Arab nationalists. The arab urban leadership ceased to function.
	The rebels were exhausted by 1939, also because of the inner conflicts in arab populations.
	
The 1939 White Paper
	As war witn germany loomed, Britain signed a bill that would satisfy the arab population and gain their support.
	This paper announced that palestine would gain its independence in 10 years as an unitary state.
		This was against the 1937 declaration.
		Palestineans were delighted by this declaration, but the zionists were outraged, but didn't see this as the end of their project.
	
Palestine during WW2
	Palestine was a logistics base for commonwealth soldiers.
	Zionists were able to strengthen themselves economically, politically, militarily
	A greater military capability compared to palestineans gave the zionists further powers compared to the palestineans
	Their movements and advancements, as well as the growing symphaty for the jews gained the zionists favour of the international community
	Even though the zionists didn't like the terms of the white paper, they cooperated with the british government to gain more favours for independence.
	Contributions from american jews amounted to $375M. This was a huge amount at the time.
	British specialists trained jewish soldiers, forming a Jewish Brigade. They got special training to fight in an anticipated german invasion of palestine.
		This gave the zionists a well-armed, well-trained, effective military force.
	By the end of the war, the zionists had a larger industraial base than it was before the war
		They profited from the war by selling supplies to the allied forces.
	At the time, much of the palestinean leadership was in prison, palestineans were not organized.
		Hajj Amin al-Husayni went from city to city in europe to enlist axis support.
		The internal conflicts within palestinean leadership also weakened their efforts
			King of jordan wished to incorporate parts of palestine into the kingdom
	The unskilled palestinean labourers migrated constantly during the period, taking short-term jobs. The zionist control of the labour market was mostly against them.
	
International developments:
	After WW2, the zionists gained international support, mainly due to growing symphaty towards jews.
	President Truman became more local in his support to zionism. They mainly cited humanitarian reasons to settle thousands of jews in the region.
	USSR was initially hostile to the zionist project as it represented bourgeoisie supremacy in a country, and saw zionism as a birtish project
		After the war, they thought that the emerging anti-british views in palestine would weaken british influence in the region.
	
From palestine to Israel, 3 phases:
	1945-47: Zionist war against the british in palestine
		During the war, britain blocked jewish immigration to the region.
		After the war, jews got further financial support. They saw this as a tool in their war against brits+palestineans.
			Jews bought arms illegally, mainy from America.
		In 1944, an armed organization launched attacks against british instalations, demanding unrestricted british immigration and settlement.
			Lehi and Irgun were fiercely nationalist, they were against british occupation.
			Haganah at first assisted the british in stropping these organizations, but they joined the rebel forces to form the Hebrew Resistance Movement.
		A new government in Britain willed to enforce the White Paper. They conducted arms searches and arrested many people.
		King David Hotel Bombing, this was a very important british holding in the region.
		"Night of the Bridges" --> many bridges were demolished to deter foreign intervention
		The British were running out of funds, they could not keep troops in Palestine. International community was also against the British for their policies in Palestine.
		UN sent a special committee (UNSCOP) to palestine to make a recommend over the fate of the region. They called for palestinean independence, but they asked for the creation of two states. Jerusalem would be international zone.
		
		UNGA RESOLUTİON 181 (29 NOVEMBER 1947)
			Recommended arab state (45%) would be mostly arab. 
			Jewish state (55%) was still only 50% jewish, but the official US policy insisted that the jewish state have further ground in administration.
			Jerusalem - Bethlelem would be international zones
			
			The jewish leadership accepted the plan, but the palestineans rejected the recommendation. The palestineans boycotted the research. They proposed leadership based on population proportions.
			Palestine looked for Arab states to support them diplomatically and militarily.
			Transjordan privately supported partition. They made private deals with Zionists where they would be allowed to annex the arab parts of the country.
				Transjordan approached Britain to annex parts of palestine. Britain approved it.
	December 1947-May 1948: Inter-communal war in the region. 
		On november 9, 1947, the partition plan was voted. Many states were forced by the US to vote in favour.
		The first days after the vote were marked by demonstrations + violent clashes between religions.
		Arab paramilitary forces were formed, but they were largely untrained.
		Arab Liberation Army was formed as a volunteer Arab League army.
		British forces were very reluctant to provide military support to any side. Their presence in the region not effective.
		Attacks on palestinean villages force palestineans to migrate and vacate the area. --> Palestinean Refugee Crisis.
			These attacks are made by zionist militias. They aim to drive the palestineans away from their UN-designated territory.
		Arab militias also attack jewish armies, but the lack of coordination between local population and militias, as well as personal rivalries and issues mostly leave them useless in this conflict.
		
		Weeks before the military withdrawal of Britain, a new plan is put into effect.
		PLAN D:
			This allows the jewish forces to conduct ethnic cleansing in the territories. They also allow the commanders to do as they please.
			The plan aims to conquer british installations and occupy,destroy and empty arab villages and towns, within and beyond the UN-designated territories.
			Along with the plan, lists of villages and urban centres to attack was sent out.
		Deir Yassin Massacre (9 April 1948)
			A target of Plan D settlements.
			A part of the plan to open the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv road blockaded by Palestineans.
			Irgun and Lehi troops entered village and opened fire on villagers. 107-254 people died.
			The invasion was used to inspire fear and compel palestineans to flee without the need for military action.
			This is one of the events that contributed to the mass exodus of hundreds of thousands of palestineans
				Others: Fall of Haifa, Death of Abd al-Qadir al-Hussayni during the battle of al-Qastal.
	May 1948-1949: The Arab-Israeli War
		When the british troops left, Israel claimed full sovereignity over territory, established territory of israel.
		After Deir Yassin, Arab states plan to invade Palestine.
			Syria, Transjordan, Egypt, Lebanon, Iraq participated. These forces are poorly trained and armed.
			Unreliable intelligence portrayed the jewish forces as much weaker than they actually were.
			Long and unreliable communication lines made cooperation very hard.
			Very limited Jordanian support, this raised egyptian influence in the region.
				They only wanted to occupy border areas and not engage in direct combat with Israeli foces.
			Iraq's participation was also very limited. They were discussing their terms of independence at the time and also communist influence was growing.
		Israeli forces had great superiority. They quickly organized and executed attack plans.
		Britain established an embargo on the countries that only used British ammunition. They had to withdraw soon.
		Israel signed an armistice with Israel, reluctantly accepting the borders of the Israeli state.
		
		Result:
			As a result of the war, ~750,000 palestinians were expelled. Between 413-531 villages, urban quarters and hamles were depopulated.
			Palestinians were not allowed to return. Their properties were seized and distributed to new jewish settlers.
			Many palestinean villages made deals with the IDF. They supported the israeli forces to be left alone.
			Gaza strip was occupied was Egypt. After the war, egyptian government had extensive influence over the region, partially helpful in development of the region.
				Displaced palestineans became the majority population of the region (~80,000 locals + ~250,000 refugees)
			(Transjordan) King Abdullah occupied and annexed the West Bank. Palestinean population was suppressed to prevent the "palestineanization" of jordanian people. Palestineans were slowly assimilated.
			Some of the palestineans could afford to move to further nations. They affected their destination countries' policies on palestinean refugees + crisis. Palestineans still remained as "unwanted foreigners".
				They remained as pawns to be manipupated at the neighbouring states' policies.