NMC278 Lecture 5
May 30, 2017

Nation & State in Interwar Turkey
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Treaty of Sevres
	Mustafa Kemal Ataturk
	Lausanne Conference and the Treaty of Lausanne
-------------
After 1918, Mehmet VI Vahdettin was in charge and had disbanded the parliament.
He ruled by decree, so he had little power over the territory he had remaining.
He was still at the mercy of the Allied powers, so he had to play along with their demands.
Allies agreed to leave the sultan in charge, but he was forced to sign a treaty which favoured the allies.

Ottoman empire divided under allied nations, following the agreements between them.
	Sevres (August 10, 1920)
		Established spheres of influence of Italy (Non-greek Aegean Region, including Afyon, all the way to Mersin)
		France was given Mersin, parts of GDA, extending north to Sivas
		Control of straits was handed to a straits commission --> Territory wanted by Russia in the war.
		Greece got Thracian provinces to the west of the straits + Izmir region. + Aegean islands
		An armenian state would be established in Northeastern Anatolia
		A kurdish autonomous state would be established south of Armenia, but the borders were not finalized.
		Gave the parliament in Izmir (a puppet of Greece) formal sovereign rights. Referendum would be held in the city to determine its territorial future.

Greece in + after WWI:
	Greece was neutral at the start of the war, but they were offered parts of Anatolia in exchange for participating in the war.
	French + British pressured Greece to join the war by blockading + bombing them.
	Greece was given the right to invade and occupy Izmir --> Greece entered the war in May 1919 by occupying Izmir.
		The French + Italians also coveted this city.
		Greece was allowed to occupy the zone until a territorial conclusion was reached, but the Greeks didn't intend to leave the region.
		Greece used their occupied lands to expand further into Anatolia.
	Greece tripled in size since the balkan wars due to Sevres.
	
Turkish Independence + War of Independence
	Armed local groups emerged to resist occupation by western powers
		They also resisted the authority of the Ottoman Sultan --> butthurt by the Sevres.
	Mehmet VI sent Mustafa Kemal to suppress these local resistance organizations
		He joined the rebels to unite them.	
	Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (1881-1938)
		Born in Thessaloniki
		Trained in miltiary academies to be an officer
		Fought in Libya + Balkan wars.
		Became a national hero in the defense of Gallipoli in 1915.
		Promoted to a general in 1916 and fought the Russian forces in the east.
	Turkish resistance:
		Respected Mustafa Kemal's military leadership.
		The Greek occupation of Izmir helped him rally the people in the turkish national cause.
			Their occupation was brutal and destructive, and they were rapidly expanding into Anatolia.
			They also aimed to de-turkify the territory ahead of the referendum by killing or displacing turks in the region.
	Turkish Republic:
		Grand National Assembly estabished in Ankara (1920)
		The GNA defied the authoriy of the sultan and declared Sevres a dead letter
		Turks allied with USSR to invade Armenia and divide it among themselves.
			USSR also wanted to decrease British + French influence in Armenia.
		The assembly renounced their claims in arab provinces (not Mosul) to make negotiations easier.
		Affirmed full turkish sovereignity in turkish majority provinces, establishing the National Pact (Misak-i Milli)
		Convinced Italians to pull out of Anatolia.
		Gained French recognition
		Britain also partially recognized the republic, pulled their support from Greece.
			Greek king was already at a horrible standing with the British.
		Focused on the Greek front after withdrawal of allied support, giving greeks 3 options:
			-Evacuate the territory completely
			-Cut losses and just consolidate over Smyrna
			-Take on Turks on their own (They chose this)
		The unified nationalist army used scorched earth policy to maximize Greek losses as they expanded further towards Ankara, they had to use long and thin supply lines from Izmir.
		Undersupplied Greek forces started losing morale.
		Turkish forces more familiar with the terrain + had USSR material support
		Greeks retreated to Izmir, city retaken in August 27, 1922
		
	Peace agreements:
		Armistice of Mudanya (October 1922)
		Lausanne Peace Conference:
			Ottoman sultan invited to the conference
			Turkey abolished caliphate + sultanate.
			Ismet Inönü demanded nothing less than full implementation of Misak-i Milli
			Turkey had to renounce their claims over Dodecanese Islands, Egypt, Sudan, Cyprus, parts of Arabia were renounced.
			The Turkish straits would remain under international supervision until 1936
			Greece had to relinquish all c laims in Anatolia, Aegean Sea becomes a demilitarized zone
		Agreement with the Greeks (Not during Lausanne):
			Both sides agreed as a massive population exchange
				Orthodox Greeks in Turkey --> Greece (~1.2M people)
				Muslims in Greece --> Turkey (~400K people)
				Led to massive humanitarian crisis
					Greek bourgeoisie forced to work in farmlands vacated by the muslims.
					They abandoned farmlands and moved to the cities, but led to further crises.
					Many riots in Greece by the new minority.
				It would take decades to assimilate these people.
		As a result, Turkey now an independent state. Now focused on consolidating power inside their country.