NMC278 Lecture 6
June 13, 2017

Egypt + Palestine After WW2
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Gamal Abd al-Nasser (r. 1954-70)
	The United Arab Republic (1958-61)
	Baghdad Pact (1955)
	Suez War (1956)
	Al-Fatah
	Palestinean Liberation Organization (PLO)
	UNSC Resolution 242
	June 1967 War
-------------
Egypt:
	Became one of the more active states in the region after WW2
	Even during the interwar period, as the most populous arab state with semi-independence, had further foreign interests.
	After caliphate was abolished in 1924, arab states stopped following Turkey (they still looked up to it for state building).
		As a result, Egypt became more influential in the region.
		It also had a functioning parliament, and had more independence from european powers.
	People thought King Fuad would be a good replacement for the abolished position of caliph.
		Egyption territorial nationalism became dominant in intellectual circles (especially after 1920's)
		This differed from Arab nationalism. Rather than religious or Arab identity, Egyptian independence was emphasized.
		Being Arab was dismissed as being non-sophisticated or inferior.
			They avoided mentioning Muhammad, as he was also an Arab.
		Intellectuals defended that Egypt was not "Arabized" when they were conquered by Arabs centuries ago.
		--> "In order to know who you are, it is important to know who you are not" --> view of the Arab as the "other"
		Secularism and modernism was also a part of this national identity.
	
	Changes in the 1930's:
		Egypt gained independence in 1936 treaty. Entered LoN.
		Also saw itself as the center of middle eastern politics
		Government of Egypt was also pressed by GBR to appear more as the centre of Arab system of independent states.
		Public education reached more people.
			--> Developments in the national identity, more people participate in the debates
			Also the developments in Gaza.
	
	Egypt's Parliamentary System - Challenges:
		The parliament distanced themselves from the common people. Questions on their legitimacy rose.
		Axis advances in WW2, GBR forced the King to appoint a pro-British prime minister (from the Wafd party)
			Wafd could no longer present itself as an anti-european nationalist party.
			Their adherence to the 1936 treaty also weakened their legitimacy.
		New king: King Farouq.
			Unlike old king, King Fuad, he was more pro-Egyptian (than being an old Ottoman official)
			Also as he was a young king, people expected him to bring more changed.
		Egyptian army defeat in 1947-48 war for Palestine left both the public and the army angry at the government policies.
			Army officials established secret contacts with radical nationalists (which later became presidents) + the Muslim Brotherhood
		
	The 1952 Free Officers Revolution:
		Organized paramilitary units launched attacks against British forces.
		King Farouq + Wafd could not stop these attacks. Their legitimacy was tarnished further.
			They tried to establish a militia to stop these attacks, but they failed.
		In July 1952, a group within the army ("Free Officers") overthrew the monarchy. Naguib, a figurehead of the revolution, claimed the office of prime minister.
		
		The free officers did not plan to run the government on the long term
			They were planning to oust the king and abolish monarchy
		With shifting alliances between military members and social forces made many reforms pass in the country.
		A growing desire to protect the revolution saw that the parliament and monarchy was abolished, all political activity was frozen under the military rule.
		In 1954, Gamal Abd al-Nasser put Naguib in house arrest, assumed the presidency.
		
	The Nasser Era (1954-70)
		Military rule in the country.
		Reforming he labour force, state focused on labour on peasantry.
		State was formed around the image of Nasser.
		Also consolidated his hold on provincial governments.
		Over time, Nasser positioned himself as an anti-imperialist.
			Started at a time when the West was trying to bring African countries under their spheres of influence.
			Third world movement
		
		Non-alignment and Arab Nationalism:
			Nasser advocated for international non-alignment
			He also defined Egypt as the center of free circles. ("Arab world" circle, "African" circle, "Islamic" circle...)
			Baghdad Pact:
				Nato-like pact in middle east.
				Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Turkey a part of it
				GBR acted as a leader in this pact
				Nasser was against the pact. He argued that this pact was GBR + US attempt to extend the cold war to the middle east.
				Nasser saw that the neutral state of Syria already had conflicts between supporters of different sides in the Cold War. This distanced him further from this pact.
			Still, his position was not popular until the 1956 Suez War.
				After this, he was seen as a leader of the free arab world.
				
	The Suez War
		British set to vacate the canal zone at 1956.
			They still reserved the right to return in case of a foreign attack (USSR)
		Egypt claimed Sudan as a part of Egypt.
			They agreed that Sudan would vote for independence
				They decided to remain independent
				The Free Officers blamed the 1936 treaty
		Nasser's advances did not please the british government.
			British weakening in Africa. They blamed Nasser for this.
		GBR refused to sell Egypt arms, claiming that Egypt had been arming rebellions
			Nasser bought arms from the USSR instead, angering GBR.
		Armed insurgents would cross international boundaries + armistice lines.
			Israel blamed Egypt for this.
			Infiltration incident in Israel.
		Israeli attack on Egyptian military headquarters in February 1955.
			Ben Gurion decied to follow a policy of force.
			Nasser armed even more insurgents in Israel.
			Egypt closed the straits of Tiran to israeli shipping (their only outlet to the Red Sea).
		By December 1955, Ben Gurion planned a major military attack on Egypt (to oust Nasser + open Tiran straits)
			France gave considerable military support to Israel
				At that time, france was fighting rebellions in Algeria, who were armed by Nasser.
			France joined the israeli plans of attack.
		US and GBR cut their funding to the construction of Aswan Dam.
			This dam was seen as the most important initiative of Nasser due to its economic importance
			US and GBR thought Nasser would revise his policies.
			As a response, Suez Canal Company was nationalized in July 1956 to cover the costs of the construction.
				The company was held by the British and French governments.
				Nasser also defended the canal was built by Egyptian workers, so it was Egyptian property.
			Nasser's radio speech across the country raised his popularity in the country. He became one of the most popular leaders in the region.
		Emergence of US and USSR. They did not want to return to the times of old colonial empires.
		GBR + France + Israel launched an attack on the Suez. Egypt's military defeated
			US + USSR forced the attackers to withdraw
				USSR was developing closer actions with Egypt
				US did not want the Western image to return to the colonial era. They also said they were not consulted in their attack plans
					USSR was busy suppressing the Hungarian revolt. Egypt's defeat would strengthen the USSR's position against the West.
					Also said British economy would not survive without US support + Israel would collapse without US support.
			Egypt defeated militarily, but Nasser rose as the hero of the Suez. Humiliated GBR + France + Israel.
				He was also hailed as a pan-Arab figure.
		After the war, Nasser expanded the police state, which also became common in the region.
	
The United Arab Repulbic
	Temporary union of Egypt and Syria. They formed a single nation.
	Nasser used the pan-Arab nationalism to unite the region, using his popularity after the Suez war.
	In 1955, a new, strong leftist and Ba'athist (Arab nationalist-socialist) party rose in Syria (still in power)
		Syria saw egypt as a supporting force for their new military government.
		Egypt was also the only way they had to acquire Soviet arms.
	Egypt agreed in 1957 to form a federal union under the condition that Syrian factions had to follow Nasser's orders.
	Political parties abolished in Syria, further integration to a political union was used as a reason. It was mainly to impose his authoriy to keep the Syrian military under control.
	UAR was formed in 1958, Nasser was the supreme ruler of both countries.
	The pro-western Hashemite monarchy in Iraq was overthrown in 1958 by a group of officers calling themselves "Free officers"
		Among the free officers was pan-Arab nationalists.
		Half of the officers sought immeidate absorption into the United Arab Republic
		The other half wanted an independent Iraq.
		The Iraqi nationalists purged Nasserists in the revolutionary regime. They were against Nasser.
	Because of Nasser's consolidation of absolute power, especially in Syrian Military, Syria withdrew from the union.
	Egyptian involvement in the Yemeni Civil war also harmed Nasser's influence. The egyptian military became bogged down in Yemen. --> "Nasser's Vietnam"
	
Palestinean Liberation Organization (PLO)
	Nasser feared losing power over palestine as well.
	Several regional bodies there appealed to Nasser for support.
	Nasser organized the first Arab Summit in 1964.
		Main aim was to resist Israel's plans to divert water from the Sea of Galilee to the new water carrier system
			They failed to stop Israel from building their project
		This project was the main reason behind PLO's establishment

Road to June 1967 War
	In 1955-56, Nasser armed factions in Gaza to resist Israeli occupation.
		Syria also supported them for some time.
	Arab states were busy with their state-building efforts. Palestinean guerilla networks became a lower priority.
	Breakup of the UAR caused further Palestinean disenchantment with promises made by governments.
		Egypt lost their position as a base of palestinean independence + host of arab unity.
	
	Grassroots Activism and al-Fatah
		Palestinean exiles from Gasa and Egypt founded al-Fatah in Kuwait
		Yassir Arafat was a leader of this organization.
			He was also in the Egyptian army in the Suez War.
		The rising petroleum production in Kuwait required further skilled labour.
		Kuwait's distance from Israel also reduced the western actions against the palestinean factions in the region.
	
	Nasser established the PLO in Cairo. al-Fatah was initially not a part of the PLO.
		They joined the organization in 1960's, and dominated it by 1969.
		The initial aim for PLO's actions was independenc for Gaza but not the West Bank (which was claimed by Jordan)
	While Egypt was using the PLO against Israel, Syria was arming al-Fatah against Israel.
		While the Ba'athist party of al-Fatah was a part of the Arab Summit, they acknowledged the PLO as an Egyptian organization.
		Nasser was no longer seen by many as a champion for Palestinean independence.
		The party also aimed to destabilize the pro-western Jordan
	Fatah launched first attacks against Israel in January 1965.
		Their attacks mostly came from Jordan, but Jordan denied any involvement.
		Because of these attacks, Israel resumed Ben Gurion's policy of force.
		Israel started attacking villages in West Bank for allowing the al-Fatah attacks to take place
			After many civilian casualties, palestinean demonstrations started against Jordan (since they did not protect the West Bank)
	In the meantime, clashes between Israel and Syria along the armistice lines increased in intensity.
		Most of these happened because of Israeli incursions into the DMZ's.
			They started sending personnel and farmers to claim these zones. Syria responded with force.
	Egypt and Syria signed a mutual defense treaty against Israel.
		Egypt believed this treaty would reduce the intensity of Syrian reckless support for Palestine. Syria believed it would push Egypt to follow a more aggressive policy
		Nasser still didn't want to fight until the arab armies were strong enough to win.
	A major aerial clash between Israel and Syria in 1967. Israel was victorious
		Jordan used this to fire back at Nasser, using his inaction as his argument.
	USSR warned Egypt that Indeed was going to strike Syria.
		USSR thought Nasser would try to de-escalate the situation.
		Nasser did the opposite, he mobilized the Egyptian military.
	Nasser ordered the UN forces to withdraw. As the UN forces were leaving, Egyptian military was mobilized. Straits of Tiran was closed.
		Nasser was mainly using this as a bluff for Israel to stop their attacks on Syria
		He also expected US and USSR to step in and stop the conflict, rather than taking part in it.
		Jordan believed that they could not afford to sit out on a war between Israel and Arab States. They joined the defense pact.
	Israeli public took the Arabian bluffs very seriously.
	The Israeli government was aware that the Egyptian forces were in no condition to launch an attack on Israel.
		They believed that they should strike first. They had justification to launch air strikes, since the straits of Tiran was blocked.
		They also had to act fast as Nasser was sending diplomats to the US to deescalate the situation in June 5th
		US also told Israel that they would not isolate Israel if they invaded Egypt.
		
The Six Day War
	On June 5th, Israel launched major air attacks on Sinai Peninsula, destroying more than 90% of their air fields
	Jordan was forced out of Jerusalem and West Bank in 2 days
	Syria was pushed back to Damascus in 5 days
	Israel conquered Egyptian Sinai Peninsula, Syrian Golan Heights, Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
		Because of this territorial change, Israel's population became 50% palestinean and 50% jewish.
	This movement strengthened the zionist movement.
	
After the Six Day War
	Israel used their victory to enforce their demands on others.
	UNSC Resolution 242 called on Israel to withdraw from the lands they occupied in the war.
	By June 25, they annexed East Jerusalem + Parts of West Bank.
		Israel encouraged its citizens to settle in these occupied territories, supporting them militarily and financially.
		They also settled in the Sinai peninsula, but withdrew their citizens from the region in 1982 after a peace agreement with Egypt.
		Israel agreed to remove all settlers from Gaza in 2005.
	All countries unanimously agreed to merge East Jerusalem with West Jerusalem
	After this period, it was unanimously agreed that an independent palestinian nation would not be able to stand.
	
	After the 1967 war, no nation dared to stifle Palestinian nationalist or militant activity.
		The guerilla movements took over the PLO in 1969. Arafat became the chairman of the organization, making them an independent organization.
		PLO moved towards a conditional acceptance of the Israeli state, as long as Palestine was also accepted as a state by Israel.
		After this period, the wars in this region were Arab-Israeli wars. It is now Palestinean-Israeli war.
		
Nasserism in Retreat
	After the Six Day War (the naksa / "set back"), nasserist pan-Arabism lost support.
	Regional power shifted more towards the oil rich states in the gulf. Most of them were US allies.
	After the military defeats, peaceful, popular resistance was followed by Arab and Palestinean intellectuals.
	In 1988, Jordan relinquished their claims and supported a two-state solution.
	Political Islam became more appealing for the people, who could not see any success in any of the political systems followed by the regional governments.