NMC278 Lecture 3
May 23, 2017

New Political & Intellectual Currents
----------------------
Main Terms:
	The Urabi Revolt
	The Suez Canal
	Sultan Abulhamid II
	Khedive Ismail
	Islamic modernisation/reform of "high islam"
	Committee of Union and Progress, and the Young Turk era
	Tobacco protests
	Constitutional Revolution of Iran
	The Nahda
	Butrus al-Bustani
	
----------------------

Situation in Egypt:
	Egypt owed a lot to GBR and FRA. These 2 countries implemented measures to be repaid.
	Egypt's shares of suez company was sold.
	GBR and FRA imposed land taxes to egyptians --> angered them
	Military was no longer funded
		No modernization
		Military personnel unhappy
	
	The Urabi Revolt (1879-82)
		People were unhappy about european control in Egyptian affairs.
		The egyptian monarch was increasingly delegitimazed by the european countries due to increasing debt.
		Khedive Ismail was forced to abdicate in 1879
			The new monarch was seen as a puppet of european countries.
		Growth of education, railroads, newpaper, telegraph connected people together.
		Ahmed Urabi became the war minister.
			Imposed demands that balanced the requests of the army officers and land owners.
			Majority of support to his demands came from discontent towards european control.
			Led an egyptian nationalist revolt against the european powers.
			GBR and FRA feared that Urabi would challenge the dual control system. 
		British Occupation of Egypt (1882)
			The Suez fleet invaded egypt in 1882.
			Direct european rule imposed, european governors are called.
			Ahmed Urabi was sentenced to exile.
			An egyptian-national consciousness was developed. The diverse cultures and classes across the country were united under one nationality.
			-Parallel to this, a new national identity started spreading in India --> Challenging Imperialism.
				-Also in Armenia.
			GBR assured that european influence would be temporary.
				Lord Cromer remained as the de facto ruler of Egypt for 30 years (was placed there for 20 years)
				Under Cromer's Rule:
					Education facilities were shut down.
					Military was almost entirely dissolved.
					Any attempts to establish factories in Egypt (unless beneficial to the crown) were denied.
					Raw materials production was empthasized.
					(Aim: to maintain Egypt's infrastructural underdevelopment, keep them as raw material producers)
					Egyptian ministries are forced to work for european interests.
						The underdeveloped region becomes increasingly dependent to Europe.
			Pre-WW1 Egyptian national identity:
				Was defined in islamic and nationalist-territorial ideas.
				Egyptian press was developed (still under occupation control, but rather free.)
				This view still had symphaty towards the Ottoman sultan, as a unifying element of a larger (muslim) community.
					These nationalist views were territorial and extra-territorial at the same time.
				There were still questions to whether one could be islamist and modern at the same time.
				Islamist modernist view:
					Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani was a leading figure in this view
						Emphasized the advancement of sciences
						Appealed to both the Sunni and Shia communities
						Called muslim people to resist against the european influence. Aimed to unify muslim people.
							--> was mainly an islamic identity, not an egyptian-national identity
						People were encouraged to establish their own definitions and views on islam --> encourages learning and thinking of scholars.
						Challenged the traditional islamic thoughts
						Encouraged people to get more involved in politics.
						Was exiled from Egypt due to his ideas.
					His disciples spread nationalist ideas from France. They were oppressed by GBR.
				Egyptian territorial nationalism:
					Rather than a religious nationalism, this was a territorial identity.
					Not very pro-Ottoman.
					Tolerated British presence to modernize and improve the region(until 1900).
					Rather than a part of a larger community, they saw egypt as a sovereign nation.
					Sought to fit traditions with modern liberal ideas.
					
					Most middle-eastern nationalist movements saw the modern Japan as an example
						They defeated Russia in the Russo-Japanese war
						Challenged imperialism.
			
			Protests, strikes, demonstrations started in 1900's.
			Clashes between colonial military and locals.
				A protest in a town was quelled with the execution of many people.
				This angered all of the country.
			The pro-british land owners benefited from the british rule.
			GBR made concessions to egyptians after 1908 demonstrations. Unrest was partially contained until WW1.

Developments in the Ottoman-istan:
	Turkish nationalism started to emerge by 1870's.
		--> "The turkish-majority nation should be ruled by and for the turkish people."
		The rulers identified with turkish nationalism only when the ottoman nationalism failed to unify the people.
	Liberal Ottomanism --> following the ideals of the tanzimat reforms.
	A parliament was established
		Participation by and owners, only males.
	European powers constantly intervened in the affairs of christians in the empire. Argued that the christians required protection by european countries.
		Armenian nationalism started growing in the center of ottoman territories.
	When the parliament was established, Ottoman turkish is introduced for the first time as the official (parliamental) language of the empire.
	Despite the liberal reforms, nationalist movements were not weakened. More nations gained independence in Balkans. (Serbia, Bosnia).
		This reduced support for liberal ottomanism.
	Military reforms still not enough to defend against Russland.
	
Post-liberal Ottoman Empire
	Abdulhamid II (1876-1909) ended liberal establishments, used islam to unify the people again and counrer separatism.
		He claimed to be the guardian and head of the islamic community.
		The ruling class tried to reform the nation as a modern islamic state/modern islamic caliphate.
		At the start of 1900's, the country was roughly 50% christian, the church still had influence over politics.
		After the christian revolts of 1800's, support towards islamic unity grew stronger.
		Abdulhamid used islam for more support
			Established religious schools across the country.
			The students helped in improving the administration and military of the country.
			Ottomanism became a viable political option for arabic speakers to have a place in ottoman bureaucracy.
		Allied with Germany to counter the aggressive european influence.
			Use of Caliphate + German support prevented any territorial losses of the empire until 1908.
		Later on, Ottomans' use of islam was ineffective. Local bureaucrats obeyed the european imperial orders.
		Abdulhamid II lost majority of his power in the country
			Reestablished a parliament
			
			
Al-Nahda
	Effectively an arabic renaissance.
	Caused by an increasing number of european christian missionaries.
		Foreign christian schools were established.
		Printing presses were developed.
	United the christian populations in the region.
	This movement was led by the arab christian intellectuals.
		They were still a minority in the region.
		Instead of independence, they looked for equality for all citizens in the empire/region.
	Some writers established an idea of an arab homeland in syria. (still not a nationalist view)
		Aimed for a decentralized ottoman system.
		
		
	Butrus al-Bustani (1819-1883)
		Maronite in the region.
		Established a national school (al-madrassa al-wataniyya)
			The curriculum in the schools differed from the local religious curricula. Science education, as well as arabic language + literature was emphasized.
		Wrote an extensive arabic dictionary + arabic encyclopedia.
		Rather than religious and territorial division, he called for a united syrian nation.
		Contributed to the growth of arab literature.
		
		Ottomans (independently) decided to establish a local parliament with GBR + FRA influence. 
			al-Bustani was wary of this since this institionalized sectarianism, divided people, weakened the region.
		

Development of turkish nationalism:
	Military rebellions in 1908, they were successful (Ataturk was effective in this conflict)
		This was caused by the Commmittee of Union and Progress (Ittihat & Terakki?), which was mostly turkish.
		Three major political trends:
			Centralizing trend
				Returning to the old bureaucratic + religious system.
				Supported by aristocrats and military elite. 
				CUP followed this.
			Decentralizing trend
				Maintaining the empire, but giving extensive freedom of religion + language
				Favoured by the upper class & rulers.
			Pro-Abdulhamid trend
				Favoured by the ulema
				"Go back to pre-1908 situation"
		CUP used internal and external issues to counter the other political trends. Sought to use a strong, centralized, homogeneous state to gain strength.
			Turned the religious institutions to state-controlled institutions.
			During & After the Balkan wars, the CUP gained almost full control of the state, purged the army officers which didn't follow its ideals.
			Got military support from Germany to reform the military.
		Turkish became more commonly used in bureacuracy. This strengthened the turkish national movements, mainly by the intellectuals.
		Due to increasing russian pressure, turkic people started coming from the caucasus to the ottoman empire.
			Elsewhere, in occupied turkic/turkish lands, people saw the ottoman turks as the unifying force of their culture + islam.
		Political Turkism was suppressed until 1914
			
Corresponding Events In Iran:
	GBR+RUS influence undermined the local producers.
	The Qajar Tanzimat-like reforms were highly ineffective due to the influence of the local pastoral nomads.
	Shah's dependence on europe increased unrest in the country.
	Nationalism also emerged in Iran as a response to increasing european influence.
	
	Tobacco Protests (1891)
		The shah gave full monopoly over production + process + trade of tobacco over to a british trading company.
		Lay reformers (controlling the labour), Ulema (concerned that the empire is growing weaker) and the Iranian merchants (duh) started mass protests in 1891.
		There was a country-wide boycott on the sale and use of tobacco in the counry.
		Telegraph was effectie in the spread of this boycott.
		The shia Ulema called for the disuse of tobacco
		The british monopoly was cancelled. The ulema gained further influence while the shah lost powers.
		GBR convinced the sultan to take a big loan, this made him dependent on british banks.
		This was the first major coordinated action in Iran
			This wasn't a nationalist movement though
			Gave rise to Iran being home to a political community, was effective in following actions.
			
	Constitutional Revolution (1905-1911)
		Muzaffir ad-Din invited Belgian officials to raise the administrative + customs systems efficiencies.
			People protested that these officials favoured russians in their control, shah did not listen to them.
		Belgian officials became Iran's de facto ministers of finance.
		Iran took further loans. This gave Russia further influence over the country.
		Secret political opposition parties emerged.
		The Russo-Japanese war + 1905 russian revolution strengthened the revolutionaries.
			The revolutionaries believed that Russia was weakening.
			They also believed a constitution such as Japan's would strenghthen Iran.
		The revolutionaries agreed that establishing a constitution would strengthen the country
			British supported the revolutionaries, seeing this as an opportunity to reduce russian influence in the country.
		The constitution + a parliament was established in 1906, but this movement faced many challenges.
			The new shah was also against the parliament.
		
	Anglo-Russian Partition
		Due to growing German influence in the world, the Russian and British rivalry over the area ended and the country was partitioned. (South (Has oil): British, North: Russian)
			The partition's terms were not announced to the Iranian government. They had little authority over the country.
		Russian + British militaries occupied the countries.
		A Russian ultimatum dissolved the parliament.