NMC278 Lecture 10
June 15, 2017

Israel and the Palestineans after 1948
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Mizrahi/sephardi Jews ("Eastern" Jews)
	Military Government in Israel (1948-1966)
	Karf Qasim massacre (1956)
	Menachem Begin
	Land Day (1976)
	The Oslo Accords (1993-2000)
-------------
The 47-49 war displaced thousands of Palestineans, a massive refugee crisis.
Roughly 156K Palestineans remained inside the border of Israel.
	They gained suffrage over time, and eventually became accepted as citizens
	They were simultaneously weakened by:,
		Israeli military rule
		Losses of land
		Israeli domination of the labour market
There is Israeli citizenship, but there is no nationality.
	Palestineans not accepted as a nationality at first.
		Israel accepted Arabs, Druze, Bedouin as legitimate nationalities -but not Palestineans.
	Palestineans excluded from the new social and political structure.
After the Zionist movement became majority in their territories and got recognized internationally, they had to consolidate their power within the borders.
	They also attracted many jews from other countries.
		Initially, the arriving jews were European jews, but later jews from other MENA countries started to arrive.
		500K - 700K jews came from MENA region. (out of ~1M jews)
		Most of these jews did not identify with the Zionist movement, but they were alienated because of the rising antisemitic sentiments and legislations in their countries of origin.
			These jews were increasinly seen as possible Zionists + strong supporters to the cause
			Also attracted to weaken the Arab countries.
				Because jewish companies were very important to these countries' economies
			Iraq also allied with the Germans because of the growing jewish threat, rise of nazism in Iraq. Israel had to act.
				Iraqi constitution that was passed later granted equal rights to the Iraqi jews. They maintained good relations with the Iraqi government.
					But after rising tensions between muslims and jews, they were targeted by people
					During British occupation of Iraq in 1941, riots against Brits also targeted the jews. Many jews were killed or forced to flee.
					The military rule made targeting the jews easier. In 1947, their economic activities were severely limited.
					In 1949, judaism was banned.
					--> This is an attempt by the Iraqi government to show that they were active in the Palestine issue.
					In 1951, after a bomb attack on a Baghdad Synagogue (blamed on zionist agencies), all jews were expelled from the country. Their properties were seized as state property.
				By 1922, 15% of Baghdad jewish
				After US efforts to evacuate the jews, only 1 jew remained by the end of 1950's.
		Initiatives by Israel compelled the jews from all countries to come to Israel --> "Conquest of the Exiles"
			"To be truly jewish, one must live in Israel"
	Developing a new Hebrew culture necessary.
	The zionist movement saw that they were now a part of a much larger political issue.
	A new identity developed, one could be jewish and Arab at the same time (that does not happen now.)
		--> Now, it is believed that one can't have both identities at the same time.
	
Arrival of oriental (eastern) jews started a gradual establishment of a new society.
	"Mizrahi" --> jews from Arab countries + surrounding (eastern) geographies.
		Initially an imposed term of differentiation by the Ashkenazi jews
		A negative connotation.
		These people came from an entirely different context in culture, geography, history
		They also practice the religion differently
		They also did not speak hebrew
	"Sephardi" --> jews from Spain and Portugal
	
Before and during WW2, Mossad realized that there was a systematic elimination of jewry
	Because they mainly depended on the european jewish presence + immigrants, this would be a threat to them.
	They also saw that judaism would be eliminated at this rate.
	This was the main reason why MENA jews were attracted.
		MENA jews were safe, but were very poor. They were promised prosperity if they came to Israel.
		Israeli attempts to attact Moroccan jews was stopped by the Moroccan king. 
		Israel promised monthly payments to Morocco if jews were allowed to leave. The king accepted.
		These jews were sent to "transit camps" and were forced to work under harsh conditions.
		These jews became employed in Israeli agriculture, but mainly sent to armistice lands, which were very dangerous. They were also forced to work in cheap basic labour sector, further increasing the division between Ashkenazi jews and Mizrahi jews.
		Mizrahi jews were also housed in seized property rather than new property.
		The Mizrahi education curriculum was also very different from the Ashkenazi curriculum.
	A growing gap between the life conditions of Mizrahi jews led to growing protests by these people. Their protests were very weak, though. Their movement grew in two directions:
		"The Black Jews"
			A radical group which wanted equal rights and life conditions
		The integrationist group
			Tried to shift power from inside. Largely unsuccessful.

The Religious-Secular divide
	A new issue re-emerged: "What is a jewish state?" "What is jewishness?"
	Labor zionists:
		Secular in looks
		Work for their religious commitments to their land.
	Yiddish was banned, modern hebrew was enforced
		Traditional names were also discouraged
		Orthodox jews became more anti-zionist, arguing that the government was no longer legitimate.
		The zionist government had to find a middle ground with the orthodox jews.
			Orhodox classes and curricula were allowed.
			All legal marriages to be seen by orthodox rabbis
			The orthodox rabbis were allowed to define who is legally a "jew", therefore entitled to citizenship + property
			Ortodox rabbis were allowed to issue kosher certificates
			The orthodox rabbis were also exempt from military service
				Instead, these people do national service.
		The orthodox jews formed their own neighbourhoods where they could keep their traditions. They also reformed the culture of surrounding jews.
		
Palestineans in Israel after the nakba
	Influx of thousands of jewish immigrants strengthened the Israeli cause. Israel deemed the Palestineans as a threat.
	Palestineans were segregated nationally, their state social services were nearly nonexistent.
	A majority of 156K palestineans remained leaderless after a series of attacks and arrests.
		They saw themselves to be at war with the state.
	The palestineans were put under military rule between 1948-66/68.
	Galilee region + Negev desert + "The Triangle"/"Arab triangle" further colonized under military rule.
	Military government had legal basis from the Emergency Defense Regulations to:
		Control and limit movement in territories.
		Prevent entry of citizens into these zones.
		Revoke any rights gained by citizens tp the palestineans.
		
	The military government was administratively divided to 3 regions as listed above.
		Each region had a military governor, under direct rule of Israeli government
		They prevented the return of palestinean refugees ("Infiltration") expelled during the war
			They could also expel the palestineans suspected of infiltration (basically anyone without the correct papers)
		They also prevented political activities among palestineans (particularly communist movement, which was growing; and the anti-zionists.)
		The military government was also there to ensure geographical separation between communities
		The state also used the military rule to seize more properties from palestineans.
		--> This was also done to regulate the number of arab in the labour market to provide jobs for the incoming jewish immigrants
			But this was relaxed in 1950's, when the growing economy needed cheap labour.
		Jewish communities were also built in the heart of Arab population centres
		The ruling Mapai party was supported by the state. They brought some benefits to the region, but was basically a puppet of the Israeli government
			Once their collaboration was discovered in 1950's, everyone stopped supporting the party.
		Informants were recruited to persecute communist separatists.
	The military rule was relaxed by mid 1950's, but roughly 90% of palestineans remained under military rule until end of 1960's.
		Because the state wanted international recognition, they could no longer isolate themselves from the others.
		"How can the state be jewish and democratic at the same time?"
		UN Requirements:
			Suffrage rights extended to all citizens
			Giving citizenship rights to everyone (but rejected by Israel due to security concerns.)
				This did not pass until 1952
				Distributed temporary residence permits and identification papers to some palestineans.
		Israel was admitted to the UN.
			Attention then shifted to draft a citizenship law which would bring more stability without threatening the jewish supremacy.
			"Law of Return":
				Endow all jews across the world to move to Israel and become full citizens
				Jews that remained in other countries gained resident status.
				This didn't address the palestinean issue.
			The Citizenship bill:
				Took a long time to draft
				To gain citizenship, palestineans would have to present written proof of mandate citizenship + must have remained in the same residence since 1948 + have their documentations granted in 1951. Otherwise, they were at the mercy of the ministry of the interior to be naturalized.
					This was a burden, since most palestineans were either unregistered, lost their papers during the war, or were displaced
					Also a problem since most palestineans were not under israeli rule since 1948.
	Opposition to the military government grew stronger.
		Initially by the communist party, but later from the zionist supporters.
		People argued that the military rule was radicalizing the palestineans, and it was solely there to gather more votes from the jewish people.
		The state also needed cheap labour.
	Long-term palestinean solution had to be made.
	During the occupation of Sinai, the Kafr Qasim massacre in 1956 made international headlines. Israel feared that more countries could join in a war against them.
		Military rule expanded the curfew from 10pm-6am to 5pm-6am.
		People were informed on the day of the change of the curfew.
		People did not have any time to respond, but the military had a shoot-to-kill order.
		Over 100 villagers were killed by the military.
		Contrary to the expectation of the Israeli government, this did not cause a mass Arab exodus.
	The palestineans were later accepted as a permanent minority. This did not last long though.
		Depending on the ruling party on the palestinean regions, the Israeli government's stance would differ.
		Process to move from military rule to civil rule started.

Palestinean Nationalism
	The main aim of the military rule was to prevent the emergence of palestinean identity.
	Military regime + second-tier citizenship + living as non-jews in a jewish state helped in forming a palestinean identity.
	After the lifting of the military rule + israeli conquest of Gaza and West Bank, palestinean nationalism became more widespread in Israel.
	The communist party, while pro-civil rights, was not explicitly anti-zionist. They caused serious problems for the Mapai party.
	In 1960's, pan-arabist + nasserist movements emerged, but were quickly suppressed.
	1967 --> "National awakening" for palestineans in Israel
	
	The Land Day Protest (March 30, 1976)
		Started the Israeli plans to seize large amounts of land to establish a large military base + settlements in Galilee region.
		Curfew was imposed to aid the land-grab.
		Heads of palestinean municipalities in Galilee, along with political representatives, declared a general strike and demonstration across the country
			6 were killed and hundreds injured/arrested by israeli security forces.
			After this, palestineans in refugee camps outside the country also held strikes.
	
	Denied repatriation to their homeland + their host countries transformed refugee camps to permanent towns.
		These towns still lacked most basic necessities.
		This also aided in the growth of a guerilla activity.
	Palestinean fighters in gaza strip started sabotage operations in Israel.
		These incursions turned to fida'i units (sacrificial units) and these units were supervised by Arab powers.
	Palestinean intellectuals in exile organized pan-Arabist and Marxist organizations that aimed to liberate Palestine.
		But these organizations were always linked to an Arab state.
	When the PLO was formed, the established notable families were members of the organization.
	Al-Fatah + fida'i movements attracted younger workers and students.
	Fida'i refused to join the PLO and reformed their organizations to resemble the Viet Cong and the FLN(Algeria). They sought to liberate Palestine, and they assumed responsibility for nationa liberation.
		This attracted thousands of supporters.
	Idea: When Israel occupied Gaza and West Bank, they would occupy a territory that was already politicized and hard to control.
	
Israel:
	Israeli jews took the palestinean national movements to address the missing parts of their own society.
	Rise of the Likud party:
		Dissatisfied Israelis rallied behind Likud and its leader, Menachem Begin.
		Menachem Begin:
			Was a leader in the nationalist paramilitary organization Irgun.
			Established an ultranationalist party called Herut. They wanted to expand Israel's borders to cover all of Palestine.
			Before the 67 war, Herut was not a popular party, was easily dismissed.
			Merged the Herut with a liberal party + a radical right-wing party + 2 ultranationalist parties to form Gahal
			Begin won a plurality in the country, breaking a long-standing labour party domination. (many labour supporters refused to vote because of corruption + arab parties that supporter labour zionists due to Land Day protests) 
		After 1967, the Labour party promised Mizrahi jews more freedoms + economic benefits. This never happened.
			Begin promised improvements in life conditions + economic growth to the Mizrahi instead. This attracted many poor Mizrahi voters.
		The ultrareligious jewish faction was tired of the labour party, and wanted to support a government that would tolerate their religious views.
		The labour party was also unsure on what to do with the majority of the occupied territories, but Likud supported full annexation of the territories and strategic establishment of jewish colonies.

The Road to Oslo:
	PLO:
		PLO were exiled from Jordan to Lebanon for turning their guns agains the king of Jordan. Then, they were exiled from Lebanon to Tunis since they took part in the civil war.
			They kept getting pushed further from Palestine.
		Because of this, PLO decided to seek a diplomatic solution. They were willing to make concessions to be recognized.
			Their attention shifted from liberation of territories to state-building efforts.
			But this decision was not approved by all parties within the PLO. (But arafat + Al-Fatah exercised absolute authority.)
		PLO renounced fighting and voiced their support for a two-state solution.
			But when he supported Saddam's regime during the Gulf War (1991), he lost almost all of his support in the gulf region.
		By the 1990's, israeli officials started talks with Arafat for a two-state solution.
			PLO had successfully brought international focus on the occupation of Palestine. Israel had to do something to repair their image as occupiers.
			US also emerged victorious from the cold war, so they would also favour Israel if they participated in the talks.
	The high-level meetings between palestinian and israeli negotiators in Oslo became known as the Declaration of Principle on Interim Self-Government Arrangements:
		Signed between Arafat and PM Yitzhak Rabin
		Matters like borders, water resources, economic status were left to be negotiated later.
		Idea: Building up a palestinean entity with 1967 armistice borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
		PLO:
			Recognized Israel as a state (but not as a jewish state)
			Renounced terrorism
		Israel:
			Recognized PLO as the representative of the Palestinean people, but not of Palestine (which was not recognized)
		Territorial classification:
			Area A: Palestinean Authority (60% of west bank)
			Area B: Partial palestinean authority (but de facto israeli control)
			Area C: Full israeli authority
		In 1995, PM Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated by a nationalist Israeli who rejected these terms
		Afterwards, Hamas rejected the terms, calling the Oslo Agreement a slow surrender of Palestine, since PLO asked for only 22% of mandate palestinean region.
	But later, due to the actions of both sides, achieving 1967 armistice borders seemed to be impossible.
		The main problem: there is still one state
		8% of israeli citizens still live in internationally unrecognized borders, live under Israeli laws and pay taxes to Israeli government.
		Israeli enjoy all priveleges brought by citizenship, have freedom of movement and economic activity while the Palestineans do not.
		--> ~30% of people in the country still not citizens.
		Israel divided the palestineans into multiple warring factions, with little unity.