NMC278

Instr. E-mail: o.jarzmik@mail.utoronto.ca

NO LECTURE ON JUNE 27TH.
-------------------------

KEY TERMS:
	-Peasants/Pastoral Nomads/Townspeople
	-The Millet System
	-Sharia
	-Caliph/Caliphate
	-Quran

Middle East:
	Reflects the perspective of European powers on eastern geography and politics.
	-In colonial British period, Midul East --> "Near East", India --> "Midul East"
	Adopted by European military planners in 1890's for a narrower area.
	Used later by american military to refer to all of North Africa up to east Iran.
	
	Reference to the system very unclear.
		-It is not geographically defining of the region.
		-It is not politically defining as many related neighbouring nations are not included.
		-It is not culturally defining, as there are many different cultures included, and some neighbouring countries of same culture are disregarded.
	
	Changes in 18th-19th centuries: Unrest in egypt, israel, palestine --> ottoman reforms in the area.
	
Midul east background:
	Mesopotamian history is among the earliet examples of modern civilization.
	Availability of water was very defining in human settlement in the region. Settlement mainly focused around the rivers.
	Some springs available around the region, allows settlements to be built further from rivers too.
		-Damascus is built around a spring.

Peepul of middle east:
	Peasants
		Bedrock of society
		Provide food to the rest of the population.
		Majority of population.
		Produce grains, fruits, make oil, grow dates.
		Society depended on the peasants.
		Taxation led to unrest/changes in society.
		
		After modernization:
			Urbanization --> population of peasants decreased
			-Mainly after 80's.
			There are still peasants, but few.
			
		Peasants were exploited by the other classes.
		Peasants of the lowlands were taxed mainly by the urbanized society while the peasants on the highlands were taxed by the pastoral nomads.
		When the peasants were threatened by the pastoral nomads, they would pay them a protection fee to ot be taxed by their townsmen rivals.
		People in mountains or other harsh terrain were under less pressure from the urban authorities due to their distance.
			These people developed a history of self-reliance and resistance against urban authorities.
			Up until end of 19th century, these people had a tradition of self-reliance.
			
	Pastoral nomads
		Significant portion of population until 20'th century.
		Herd animals, migrate to find water + feed for animals. May travel between highlands and lowlands.
		Migration mainly cyclical and organized.
		More powerful pastoral nomads were traders (between midul east and india/china).
		Produced the animal products that the society needed.
		Had strong trade relations with peasants, trading what each the other couldn't produce.
		Protected merchants on trade routes.
		
		Now it has mostly disappeared.
		Pastoral nomadic affiliations serve different purposes now.
		In contemp. Jordan + Saudia, tribal identities were used to spread government influence across the countries.
			Saddam's use of tribes to influence people is an example.
		
	Townspeople
		People who lived in and around towns in the area.
		Urban areas have artisans, merchants, bureaucrats, ....
		Cities were centre of manufacturing, intellectual activity, culture, commerce.
		The towns were where all classes of the society traded the items they needed.
		
	Pepul of midul east were interdependent. The fall of one would damage the others too.
	In towns and cities today, descendants of peasants and nomads are more dominant (where many are 2nd or 3rd gen. townspeople)
		-It is easier to tax, surveil them. Tribal identities are also weakened in urban areas.
		-People would setle in towns when there were droughts.
			In 2004, ~1.5 million syrian people moved to towns and cities as a result of droughts.
			Devrease in gov't support to agriculture only raised the effects of droughts.


Ethno-linguistic groups

	Main groups (in descending order): Arabs, Turks, Persians, Kurds, Jews
	These groups are not entirely homogeneous.
	Cultures are mostly defined linguistically.
		eg. A persian Kurd can't fluently converse with a turkish Kurd
	Jews in the area are now united under Modern Hebrew


Midul east politics and communities, simplified.
	Communities become minorities when areas are nationalized under another culture.
	eg. in turkey, iraq, iran and syria, there are many kurds where they are a minority.
	Nation states is a rather recent issue in the area.
	In this sense, midul east is comparable to post-colonial africa.
	European colonial powers only gave way to ethno-linguistic identities for their benefit --> also more effective in defining of the region.
	Downstream countries on rivers depend on upstream counries.
		Water issues form a crucial background to many political issues, wars, state boundaries.
	
Background of muslim states in pre-modern era
	Islam has been a medium of cultural communication in the region.
	Islam is many phenomena combined; It can depend on how one identifies it.
	
	There were two non-nation states in the region: Persian empire + Ottoman empire.
	Ottoman empire:
		Is named after Osman, "Osmanli"
	Persian empire:
		"Khajar"? dynasty ruled it. Had turkic backgrounds.
		
		
		
Non-national dynastic empires:
	Ruling language is not enforced across the empire. There were many languages in the region.
	Other than the ruling dynasty, ethnicity had very little effect on political influence, the ruling class came from many enthnicities.
	The ruling classes had to be muslim by birth or by conversion.
		Collected taxes from the populace, but were exempt from tax themselves.
		By 18th century, a majority of ottoman europe was christian. They chose local ruling families to be regional power brokers and to make management easier. Also helped them in maintaining their authority and collecting taxes.
		Ottomans maintained the greek orthodox church as a means of keeping power over the orthodox world.
		-Islam recognized christianity and judaism as legitimate religions, "religions of the book"
	Focus of production was production for consumption, not for export.
		
	Ottomans:
		If not muslim, pay "Jizya" for protection
		Official court languages: Court turkish, court persian. Other languages were also present.
		Used the "Millet system" starting from the 15th century. Picked the main religious communities as millets, with religious autonomy.
			Mainly: Greeks, Jews, Armenians.
			Did not recognize catholic autonomy as they were always at war with catholic states. Put them under armenian patriarchy.
			Each millet was self-governing to an extent. They could tax, change local laws, change how religious institutions could be run.
			Each religion had their own religious courts, but anything involving a muslim member went through the sharia court.
			Status of millets changed with shifts in policies.,
				e.g. syrians in syrian unrest times.
			Not all populations in a millet identified with the ruling church.
				-All orthodox churches were listed under the greek orthodox church
				-All jewish groups were listed under a general jewish millet.
				But still, they were a part of the general religious system.
			The shia were never recognized as a majority by the sunni gov't.
				Especially on the border regions with the persian empire.
				They followed a "live and let live" policies with these shia.
				The shia communities never stood against the sunni governemnt, and the government did not bother the shia communities in return.
		Devshirme system:
			"Collection"
			In conquered regions, 1/40 of children would be recruited into an elite slave force.
			Would prioritize children with strong character, between ages 8 and 16
			Would be imposed as a tax to the village
			Would go through training to decide who would become soldiers, the most intelligent ones would be bureucrats and grand viziers.
			Would be converted to islam at an early age to ensure loyalty to the sultan.
		Only when nationalism surged the millets started to rise to enforce their ethnic majority.
			Greek nationalism had its backgrounds in 18th century. With foreign support, they rose against the ottoman empire.
				1821-1829 made a greek state which was free from ottoman rule, but they were still puppets of european counries.
			Serbian nationalism got almost no external support for a long time, that's why they took so long to rise against the ottomans.
			Armenians were too few to rise against the empires, so they got along with governments.
			
		Hierarchy (In descending order)
			-Sultan
			-Provincial administration
			-Tax collection agents (collect taxes and give to provincial administration)
			Depending on the location:
				-Bishops and rabbis (for christians and jews)
				-Guild heads (tax their artisans)
				-Quarter heads (tax city quarters)
				-Pastoral heads (for tribes)
			
			
			
	Persian Empire (safavids?):
		Shia majority
		Zoroastrians persecuted, armenian christians supported as they were very important commercially.



