NMC278 Lecture 6
June 1, 2017

Nation & State in Interwar Turkey, continued
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Treaty of Sevres
	Mustafa Kemal Ataturk
	Lausanne Conference and the Treaty of Lausanne
	Reza Shah Pahlavi
	The Muslim Brotherhood
	Hassan al-Banna
	Sa'd Zaghlul and the Wafd
	Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1936
	League of Nations and Mandates System
	King Faysal I of Iraq
	The Syrian Arab Revolt
	Lebanese National Pact of 1943.
	'Abd al-Azi Ibn Saud
-------------
Interwar Turkey:
	Headgeaar ban
	Sufi and religious orders banned
		Rebellion of a prominent sheikh accelerated the bans
		They still exist today
	Turkification:
		There were many minorities in turkey.
		Regardless of language spoken, people were asked to think and act politically as "Turks"
		Non-national identities to be marginalized and subordinated to turkish national identity and loyalty.
		Kurds very numerous. They are slowly assimilated into turkish culture.
		Radical and comprehensive language reform in 1928
		Alphabet replaced altogether wih latin alphabet to eliminate literacy monopoly by religious minority + christian minorities.
			Persian and Arabian elements had to be removed from the language.
			This happened within a period of 3 months
			Literate turks were rendered illiterate in this short period
			They believed that short-term pain is essential for long-term prosperity.
			Growth in literacy seen as a major step in nation building.
		Without a national industrial base, they believed that the country's political independence might be compromised.
			After the Balkan wars, the country lost its financial resources
			Departure of educated christian people also left a highly unskilled lower class workforce
			They sought investments to build national economies
			Capitulations agreements expired in 1929.
			The financial crisis of 1929 paved the way for state-centered approach to industrialization in 1930's.
			Turkey got interest-free loans, advisors, equipment from USSR.
			A 5-year plan was inaugurated in 1934.
				Mostly internally financed, through taxation and employment of peasants.
				Atatürk was the pioneer of state capitalism in the country.
				Still, majority of workforce was employed in agriculture and agriculture was not reformed for a long time.
			Atatürk named "Atatürk" after the surname laws were implemented.
			Turkey's structure was the first of its kind in the region. It was used as a model by other middle eastern nations after they gained independence from western countries.
Interwar Iran:
	Iran was under British rule in this period.
	Nationalist movements emerged, but they did not have a common goal (except for eliminating the western influence over the counry.)
	Britain occupied southern oil fields and defended against the bolsheviks at north.
		This brought more support to nationalist groups
	Iran sought help from US. Mostly economical support + loans.
	By 1921, Britain stopped pressing Iran to sign the 1919 treaty.
	Reza Khan:
		In February 21, 1921, a colonel from the Cossack Brigade, Reza Khan demanded that the government appoint a revolutionary to a government office, and he asked to be the war minister.
		Sayyid Zia al-Din (pro-biritish moderate) was appointed prime minister.
			pushed for land reform.
			planned a modern industrialized economy. 
			Annulled british agreeements
			Restored relations with the USSR.
		Communist parliament in north supported Reza Khan's argument that there was strong division in the counry		
		By 1925, he was strong enough to abolish the Qajar dynasty. He assumed kingship + title of shah.
		After that point, he was called Reza Shah Pahlavi.
		Under his rule:
			Iran became a "modern state", ruled through centralized bureaucratic institutions. Monopoly of legal force within borders.
			County was strongly influenced by modern Turkey
			Women's rights expanded.
			Persian was accepted as the official language of state.
			Political life was heavily suppressed, but intellectual activities continued to spread.
			Universial military conscription was introduced.
			Urban and rural police forces strenghtened, became an instrument of government rule.
			Organized the army on a british model. Created iran's largest armed force so far.
			People were very unhappy with his political repression.
			In 1931, unilaterally cancelled the concession to a british oil company. The agreement was renewed in 1933 so that iran got more revenue from the oil produced, but the agreement was extended to 1993.
			National bank was established in 1927. It was the first national bank in Iran.
			Reza shah was supported by many strong intellectual groups in his early years.
			He wanted to subject Iranians directly to state authority (just like Atatürk's aims).
			Pastoral nomads were forced to resettle under threats by the armed forces.
			Ulema was pressured further as their autonomy decreased. New laws were passed to exclude them from bureaucracy.
			Dar-al Fanun was pressured to pursue modern education.
			Unlike Turkey, where religious institutions were completely subjugated, Ulema still maintained their rights in Iran.
			Public education institutions were expanded.
		Oil industry and national infrastructure:
			Reza Shah invested in expanding the country's modern production capabilities and its infrastructure.
			Oil revenues were a key part in the state income.
		Cultural wars:
			Islam was seen as a source of backwardness. Iran's pre-islamic past was emphasized.
				They believed that iran's modernization should not be achieved by imitation of western nations, but from using Iran's pre-islamic roots.
				Pre-islamic dynasties were held as archetypes of statehood.
				The belief that Iran was modernized DESPITE the prominence of islam was emphasized.
			Reza shah was hostile to islamic norms.
				He aimed to reduce the infuence of religious traditions in everyday life.
				Outdoor religious processions and ceremonies were supporessed.
				Hijab was banned outright.
		Expansion of military was seen as a necessary investment to ensure strength and sovereignity.
Interwar Egypt:
	Britain was occupied by British forces since 1880's.
	Egyptian political leadership emerged in the years prior to WW1, being called the representatives of people. They believed that british protectorate would end after WW1 if Egypt participated in the war.
	Woodrow Wilson stated that allies had to respect national self-determination. Egyptian elites thought brits would honour this.
	After WW1, British soldiers remained in Egypt, mainly to secure the suez.
	Emergence of Wafd:
		Egypt politicans announced their intention to form a delegation to represent Egypt at 1919 conference
		They signed a petition to go to Paris to represent Egypt
		Brits arrested all delegates. The delegates were hailed as national heroes overnight.
	Sa'd Zaghlul and 1919 Revolution:
		Sa'd Zaghlul became a national hero overnight.
		Nationwide revolt in forms of riots and demonstrations in favour of egyptian independence.
		People resented the british rule, especially after the martial law during WW1
		There were many groups. Their common goal was the overthrow the british influence.
		Britain had 2 options:
			military suppression (too expensive)
			making a compromise, meeting the egptians halfway
		Britain chose 2nd option. They did not meet Wafd, but the met the Egyptian sultan (from ali dynasty).
			Negotiations lasted until 1922, but no agreement was reached.
			Britain made an unilateral declaration to make Egypt an "independent" state, still reserving 4 points:
				Britain retained the right to reserve a garrison in suez canal.
				Britain reserved the right to defend egypt against any foreign power (declares egypt under british sphere of influence)
				Capitulations and extra rights for religious minorities would be preserved.
				Britain demanded that the status quo remain in Sudan (ie. it will be egyptian territory, but under British control.)
	Egypt was not happy about the agreement. They had some internal autonomy at most.
		Constitution proclaimed in 1923, parliamentary elections held in 1924.
		Egypt was declared as a liberal constitutional monarchy. A member of ali dynasty became a king and head of state.
		King and Britain saw the parliament and wafd as a rival in the country's rule.
			Britain supported the Wafd to destabilize the country, reduce the powers of wafd.
			Most parliamentary members were large landowners. They were insensitive to the plight of the poor.
	Emerging social-political forces:
		School graduates found their opportunities to be limited.
		Unemployed graduates developed critiques of the society. They affiliatd themselves with various opposition parties.
		The muslim brotherhood emerged.
	The muslim brotherhood:
		Founded by Hassan al-Banna, a school teacher, in 1928.
		Questioned whether modernisation and islamisation was possible at the same time.
		They believed that Egypt would remain weak as long as the monarch under british control had power.
		Also defended that elites of Egypt had lost touch with their culture and core values.
		Leadership:
			Many middle class, white collar professionals and degree holders
			They organized primarily among the urban poor (neglected by the ruling class)
			Worked around mosques and urban centres.
			Gave employment opportunities to the rural poor, who were ignored by the government.
		Established workshops for people, employed poor people, rallied millions of people to their cause.
		By the time of WW2, they were a mass organization spread to other arabic-speaking countries, especially establishing branches among their intellectual class.
		They were adamant about national independence.
		They defended workers' rights and the constitution, helping the urban poor.
		They became the first large-scale modern islamic movement in the middle east.
		They were effective in 2011 uprising, but they are marginalized since then.
	One notable achievement of the parliamentary system was the anglo-egyptian treaty of 1936
		Britain would recognize egypt's independence and they would sponsor egypt's membership in LoN.
		Britain would maintain their right to have a military garrision in the suez canal only, but only for 20 years (1956.)
		Egyptian army was placed under egyptian command for the first time since 1882.
	After this treaty, egypt still had not achieved full independence.

French and British mandates:
	French and british governments aimed to create governments increasingly dependent on their colonial governemnts, so that they couldn't break ties even after independence.
	Characteristics:
		Creation of coonial state structures depended on long term european support
		repression and coercion necessary in new states
		british and french saw allies in populations of the countries, dividing them to rule tme easier.
		britain and france must control the mandates' natural resources.
	Example of Iraq:
		Faysal was muhammed's direct descendant, so he would legitimize british mandate over the region.
		They felt confident in their position in Iraq to cancel the mandate. Several pro-british regimes continued to rule Iraq for several decades (until 1950's).
			Another reason that they canceled the mandate was that they could no longer afford to have military presence in Iraq.
		Disastrous long-term consequences for Iraq, especially under Faysal. They were sunni muslims, and sunnis were a minority in Iraq.
	Example of Syria/Lebanon:
		Unlike Britain, France could not establish solid ties with the Syrian ruling class, so they weren't confident enough to release Syria.
		They maintained military presence until government collapsed in WW2.
		The French maintained close ties with the maronites, even after the mandates were over. They remained francophone, maintained french as a secondary official language.
	Both Britain and France relied on experienced colonial officials in administering their mandates.
	Typically, Britain and France tried to cooperate with ex-ottoman bureaucrats and military officers in their mandates.
	After the ottomans collapsed in 1918, they supported independent arab states rather than european mandates.
		The main tool used by europeans was to use the ethnic and sectarian divisions, as well as supporting large landowners, urban notables, tribal leaders.
Iraq, detailed:
	King Faysal I installed as the king of Iraq in 1921.
		He & His cabinet was mostly ex-ottoman bureaucrats and army officers. Sunni Arabs in a Shia majority country.
	The countryside was still controlled by the tribal sheiks. Their claims to ownership over land was recognized by British to gain their loyalty
	Faysal depended on Britain for protection + enforcement of unity against minorities. British used their influence to gain entire control over Iraq's oil fields, only paying royalties to Iraq.
		Their economic & Political dependence on Britain gave Britain full confidence in ending the mandate early.
	Anglo-Iraqi treaty of 1932:
		Air force had right to maintain military bases in Iraq
		Had to coordinate foreign policy with Britain
		Recognition of foreign ownership over railways, ports, oil fields.
		Iraq obtained formal independence
		Entry into the LoN
		Control over internal affairs.
Transjordan (British):
	Britain's accidental mandate.
	Created as a buffer zone to bring order to this tribal area
	There were no resources in the region, but Britain created this mandate to maintain a buffer zone.
	Amir Abdullah was very ambitious, claimed the throne of Syria and Iraq, was very disappointed. Was given the throne of Transjordan.
	1928 treaty:
		Britain had control over foreign policy, armed forces, all essential government ministriet, budget.
	Civil administration was mostly run by foreigners.
	Abdullah remained staunchly pro-british. Transjordan gained independence in 1946 without too much stability changes.
	Palestinians dominated most Jordanian offices after war in Israel. This angered many Jordanians.
Syria and Lebanon, detailed:
	France sought to make ruling easier by dividing the territory into smaller states.
		Lebanon --> christian majority
		Alawite state --> duh.
		Jabal Druze --> mountain
		State of Aleppo
		State of Damascus
		Alexandretta --> 50% arab, 50% turkish. Ceded to turkey.
	The only state that was stable was Lebanon, all others merged to form Syria.
	Maronite politicians and intellectuals saw the old ottoman district of mount lebanon as a maronite homeland.
		As a response to this, France expanded "Greater Lebanon" to a larger territory. Christians formed a narrow majority now, this raised their dependence on France (as planned)
	Druze and Alawites also marginalized by Ottomans. French patronized these groups and created an ethnic consciousness to counter the sunni arab population in the region. (de-arabizing the Druze)
		"Support the French because they will support your ethno-religious identity against the sunni arab majoriy."
	The French also patronied tribal chiefs + recognized their right to land ownership to bind them to French cause.
	
	--> french policies were highly unsuccessful in achieving french goals.
		Druze were the leaders of an armed revolt against french mandate.
		Also, rather than conflicting with the sunnis, they strenghtened their ties with the sunni urban elites in Damascus and Aleppo.
		Anti-French rebellions grew larger.
		Yougner generation of Alawites no longer supported the French rule.
			The modern, educated alawites which had studied in state schools built by the french supported independence and arab nationalism more.
		Syrian Arab Revolt of 1925-1927
		The urban elites, who had great influence in their surroundings, sought more indepdendence.
		After the armed revolt was suppressed brutally in 1927, the people saw that they did not have the power to overthrow french mandate yet.
			Local power brokers decided to cooperate with the french to gain concessions from them
			The French were not willing to make concessions the local power brokers wished.
		A stalemate was maintained until 1940, when the french government collapsed.
		
	Lebanese mandate was more successful than in Syria.
		Still, even the maronites felt alienated by extensive french influence in everyday affairs.
		Currency was the French Franc, which was very weak. Economic crisis in lebanon was particularly acute in 1930's.
		Lebanese groups saw that they had to cooperate with each other to have a better bargaining power against the french.
		
	A leftist French government was receptive to signing independence treaty with Syria and Lebanon, but all negotiations collapsed within months.
	In order to avoid Turkish hostility in an anticipated war with the Germans, France ceded Alexandretta to Turkey, angering Arabs.
	By 1939, Syria stil did not have any autonomy over its territories.
	Syrian + Lebanese muslims and christians found common ground in objecting French rule. There was still no agreement on their borders.
		The maronites saw Lebanon as their homeland, and still defended that their culture was phoenician/european rather than Arab.
		Some steps were taken in Lebanon:
			Equality of sex in government
			Power sharing between Muslims and Christians in Lebanese government, disrupted by the French.
			The President + Prime Minister came together and signed a national pact:
	Lebanese National Pact (1943):
		They agreed to share power in government.
		Lebanon was recognized as a distinct entity. Arab identity of the state and its national culture was accepted.
		Distribution of political structures among christian sects, sunnis, shias, druze.
		Christians outnumbered muslims by a ratio of 6 to 5 --> that ratio must be represented in government too.
		Distribution:
			President + Commander of army --> maronite
			President --> sunni muslim
			Speaker of parliament --> shia.
			Commander of army --> druze
		This distribution would remain until the civil war in Syria.
		This pact ensured Maronite and Sunni majority in the country, dominated many sectors in the state. Shia were marginalized.