NMC278 Lecture 11
June 19, 2017

The Iranian Revolution of 1979 and "Political Islam"
----------------------
Main Terms:
	Muhammar Rashid Rida (1865 - 1935)
	Hassan al-Banna (1906 - 1949)
	Sayyid Qutb (1906 - 1966)
	Nazira Zayn al-Din (1908 - 1976)
	Jalal Al-e Ahmad (1923 - 1969)
	Ali Shariati (1933 - 1977)
	Hizbullah (est. 1982)
-------------
Iran:
	Opposition parties to the shah were:
		Marxist movements
		Student groups of various political views
		Religious opposition
			The Ulema
			The modern religious thinkers
	By November 1978, Reza shah agreed to full restoration of monarchy and elections, but opposition wanted monarchy to end.
		LibSocDem wanted a parliament
		Marxist wanted a more radical change from the past, rule by peasants
		The left: Trotskists, Maoists, Radical islamists
	Early 1979:
		The ulema announced that they had no intention to run the government
		Not many had followed Khomeni's doctrines/ideas earlier.
			But it would be used to unify the opposition units.
	The shah was forced to flee. The provisinal government had many different elements, not very cooperative
		Khomeni achieved supremacy over these parties by 1981.
		--> He filled the spot of "supreme ruler" after that point.
	Democratic council present, but the "supreme ruler" and the "guardians council" had veto rights.
	
	After conflicts with Iraq, Iran emerged as an islamic republic.
		Still had roots in the royalist government.
		Identified with the Iranian nationalism.
			--> Less royalty, more nationalism.
		Nuclear power + development. Iran sought further independence.
	Political changes:
		Multiple new political views + experimentations (mainly left), most failed.
		
	After the reforms, clergy used shia ideas to draft their constitution.
		
"Political Islam"
	Islamic political currents (muslim brotherhood, etc.) also present in politics.
	Main differences: promises and expectations before 1967, and what actually happened.
		Nasser's promises of prosperity never happened. People disillusioned with the new movements.
	Further movements, promising social justice, greater power.
		Rather associated with political islam.
	Hizbullah
		Inspired by the Iranian revolution
		Aimed to dismiss foreign interventions
		A nationalist group
	Some groups also believed that parliamentary institutions are possible to remain within islamic views, it all depends on one's approach to the topic.
	The Mujahedeen ("Holy warriors")
		Formed to counter soviet invasion of Afghanistan
		Later responsible for attacks on Europe
		Also a political power in the region.
	Encouring people to think of Islam as a form of civilization
		Not only a bond between people and god, but also a culture unifying people
		Also shaped the cultures and development of many groups of people over centuries.
	
Academic society in Europe saw islamism as a fading cultural view. It was forecast that it was a personal action, not an institutional option. The developments differed from this.
	Egypt after 1967 + Iran after 1979 a counterexamle to this, where political islam is followed.
	
Muhammad Rashid Rida
	European education, knew foreign languages
	His ideas influential on the sunni muslim thinkers of the time
		"Why are muslim countries underdeveloped?"
			He believed islam was compatible with modern world if interpreted correctly. Oterwise they would return to barbarism.
			At the same time, technical skill is universal, not the sole possession of the christian west.
		Champhioned the idea of Salafiyya as the correct approach to the modern problems
			--> Returning to the ancestral traditions, but not emulating the 7th century ways.
	"So long as muslims are content with imitating old ways, they will be weakened"
		Return of islam to the central position of life required adaptation of laws and social changes.
	Prior to WW1, he believed that an islamic legal reform was needed to form an islamic government.
		Later on, he abandoned the idea of caliphate and supported arab nationalist movements.
		Rather than seeking islamic unity, he supported the arab unity --> national unity much stronger than religious unity.
	Reacted against the growing idea of liberal nationalism, also resisted the growing western culture in Egypt.
		Rida also had very limited exposure to European elements, compared to those who wanted westernization.
		De-emphasized the idea of selectively learning from the west.
			--> Stop looking for the west to find answers to own problems.
Hassan al-Banna
	Founder of the revivalist muslim brotherhood in Egypt in 1928.
	Particularly influenced by writings of islamic thinkers.
		Frequented Rashd Rida's intellectual cicles, continued his views after Rida's death.
	Brotherhood:
		Accepted modernization of islam, but only as loıng as it followed moral traditions.
		Organizes a return to islam, advocated by closer readings of Qur'an.
	Al-Bana saw that cultural westernization was a culture to the people.
		He emphasized the strength of religious thought.
		Sought self-sufficiency of the islamic communities.
		Argued that the integrity of the community must be preserved against the challenges rising from the West.
		Sought an islamic state with religion being central to the state education.
	
	The attempted assassination of Egypt's president was blamed on him. He was exiled and assassinated.
	When the brotherhood tried to assassinate the president again, the brotherhood was banned.
	Nasser allowed the brotherhood for a while, but the group was banned and disbanded after a failed assassination attempt on Nasser.
Sayyid Qutb
	Born to a relatively wealthy family of landowners.
	Religious education, raised in a pious household.
	Started out as a liberal secular thinker, optimistic about his thoughts in 1920's.
	Studied in a school dedicated to mediation between traditional islamic studies and "modern" secular thinking.
	Put his trust on the secularist Wafd party, especially in countering the british influence in Egypt.
		However, Wafd was unable to counter the british king's influence
		Secularism was also more confrontational in his era.
		--> Lost faith in the modernization attempts of Egypt.
	After a visit to the US, he officially joined the brotherhood in 1950.
	Under the Nasser regime, initially kept close relations to the Free Officers, thought they could affect Egypt's future course.
		But was arrested once the government took anti-brotherhood measures
		His experiences in prison formed his uncompromising views.
	In his work "Milestones", he defended that all societies, including Egypt, are steeped in jahiliyyah --> maintained through the persistent denial of the absolute sovereignty of god.
		Argued that those who followed the law of man was rebelling against the word of god.
		The enthusiasm for foreign knowledge in the Umayyad era was the cause of this ignorant society.
		According to him, the perfection of society was based on the era of the first four caliphs.
		--> "With the exception of western technologies, anything non-islamic must be destroyed"
	Believed that non-muslims and shia should be converted. Use of force only a last resort, but can be used if needed.
	"Return to Islam" ideas spread.
	Egypt's limited improvement in military performance was credited to the "turn of piety" from egyptian president, Anwar Sadat.
	
	Ideas assisted in developing an islamic-government parallel society.
		However, Sadat's actions allowed radical groups to gain ground on state campuses.
		Those behind his assassination moved East to join the groups there.
		--> Rise of armed propaganda groups. Delegitimization of moderate resistance.
Nazira Zayn al-Din
	Not well known for her ideas at the time outside of Lebanon, but caused controversy and anger among clerical classes in Lebanon
	Published a 400+ page book of legal and theological scholarship, called "Unveiling and Veiling"
		--> An early Muslim feminist, speaking from within the Salafi tradition
	She argued that:
		Selective chapters in Qur'an that give priveleges to men over women should not be used to make a male dominated society.
		Sharia must be restricted only to the matters addressed in Qur'an itself; innovative, contextualized interpretations must be encouraged.
		Veil was a hindrance to progress, and a violation of the spiritual message of the religion.
		The interpretations of the clergy clouded the society's view on religion.
	The opposition saw the unveiling of women as the emancipation of women, and the westernization of the country.
		At the time, veiling was enforced by the society, rather than being left as a personal choice.
		She was challenging a well-established clerical class.
			Some members of this class was receptive to her ideas
			But her appeal to the western colonial forces was used by the opposition to counter the legitimacy of her ideas.
	Her questions still discussed by feminists in the region today.
Challenge of Sunni and Shia thoughts to westernization.
	Many shia thinkers came from the ulema class, while sunni modernists were directly influenced by the west.
		Marxist thought common across the Shia world, as it advocated for the integration of the minorities into a larger community.
	Radical groups accused the stagnant conservative groups and the Ulema of weakening the state, especially since there was little progress in the society.
		The groups were tired of the governments' crackdown on their actions. This led to the rise of the Mujahedeen.
		They were influential in the success of the Iranian revolution, but were outlawed by Khomeni later, due to their radicalism.
Jalal al-e Ahmad
	Iranian novelist, translator, anthropologist and social critic. Was also a communist under the Tudeh party, but left after the organiztion's "Stalinist shift"
	Published a book called "Westoxification"
		"Intoxication by the west"
		Blind dependence on the west in iran.
			Also their indiscriminate embracing of the western ideals.
		The antidode was renouncing the west and embracing the "popular shiism".
	He saw the shia ideas as necessary to mobilize and strengthten the people against the western colonialism.
Ali Shariati
	Teacher, sociologist, revolutionary.
	Was on good terms with the Mujahedeen.
	Involved in pro-mosaddiq movement in early 1950's.
	Went to study in France, influenced by the revolutionary thinker Frantz Franon.
	Started working in a university, but was later dismissed due to the contents of his courses.
	Attacked the "cultural colonization" of the west, argued that they alienated the iranian people from their roots.
	Instead of an iranian imitation of marxism, sought the "islamic humanism". Return to the pristine, ideal islam tha dated back to the first years of the religion.
		According to him, Islam became corrupt once it became institutionalized.
		Rejected the islam of the ulema
	Argued that justice was very integral to islamist thought and to any society in general.
	His books were forbidden by the shah, but they were circulating across the country by 1977
	Escaped Iran later, fearing that Pahlavi regime would come after him. Died shortly after.
	Was very influential in the revolution of 1979, influence almost equal to that of Khomeni's.
Hizbullah("Party of God")
	In 30's and 40's, bulk of lebanese population was rural
		In a subordinate political and economic position
		Dominated by strong families in the region.
	In the 1943 "National Pact", the sectarian + religious conflict increased rather than being contained.
	Many radicalized intellectuals aligned with communist movements, socialist baathist parties and other secular nationalist parties.
	"Movement of the Deprived" - Shia populist reform movement in 60's.
		Resulted in the AMAL. This group was later encouraged to mobilize and become more active, opposing the sectarian and christian domination.
		Demanded proportional inclusion of the shia in the lebanese political structure.
		Initially trained by al-Fatah and PLO, but later turned on them (during the civil war).
	Still, AMAL was not ideologically coherent. Did not offer a comprehensive vision.
	Later, Hizbullah was establisshed during the civil war, especially after the israeli invasion of beirut.
		Initially organized to resist the israeli invasion of Beirut, but later targeted all forms of occupying forces.
		By 1985, a more explicit stance against the West (US + Communism) was announced.
			Championed the idea "Neither East nor West."
		For them, self-help and self-organization was the solution. 
	After the end of lebanese civil war, anti-western rhetoric and fierce ideological tenor of their original pamphlets cooled down.
	They accepted that the islamic system was impossible to enforce in a place as diverse as Lebanon, and that a gradual reformation was necessary.
		This required a strong shia voice in the government.
	Their sectarian rhetoric also cooled down over time. They rather focused on the issues of economic exploitation, developing infrastructure, fixing the inequalities inherent in Lebanese system, subsidizing the price of basing goods, and security/resistance against israel (a major issue)
	By the 2000's, a previously radical party that demanded nothing less than shia domination gained a place in the Lebanese government.
		Are active in the development in the country. 
		Still have a militia independent of the Lebanese army (and stronger than the army)
		Financally and politically supported by Iran and Syria.
		