NMC278 Lecture 2
May 18, 2017

-----------

Main Terms:
	Ottomanism
	Ulema
	Janissary Infantry
	Muhammad Ali
	Nasir ad-Din Shah
	The tobacco protests
	Sultan Selim III
	Sultan Mahmud II
	The Greek Revolt
	Tanzimat
	Dar al-Fanun
	Cossack Brigade
	Evelyn Baring/Lord Cromer

-------------

Ottoman Empire
	Hierarchy in rule
		1. Sultan
		2. Provincial Administration
		3. Tax collectors, including: religious authorities, village shayks, quarter heads, guild masters, chieftains.
			Some of these groups had more bargaining powers and negotiated with multiple sides if needed.
			Some pastoral chiefs would saw themselves as equal to the sultans and shahs.
			Towns were directly subject to imperial authority, but they also had more demands from the empire due to their proximity.
			Some commercially active groups would have direct influence over the sultan.
		Bureaucracy well structured. Everything is extensively documented, hierarchy strictly enforced.
		Generals and governors had extensive powers and resources in their large provinces, and often rose against the sultan in later centuries. They were kept in check by the Sultan.
		Sipahis were kept in check by the Jannisaries. They were landed soldiers, paid taxes.
		
Effect of New World:
	Wealth coming in to Europe from overseas colonies since 16th century.
	Centre of economy shifted towards western europe, trade became atlantic oriented.
	European merchants sought advancements --> technical innovations
	Merchant influence on state politics, countries maximized exports.
	Middle eastern economies were subsistence-oriented, so they were challenged against export-oriented countries.
		In Ottoman Empire, the ruling class had control over production.
		Starting from 18th century, the lower classes had increasing control over what they produce.
		European commercial advances influenced the local power holders in the Ottoman Empire to trade with them --> Got more power.
			The local power brokers would independently establish trade ties with European markets.
			Imperial authority was weakened
			The central authority holders had to tolerate this, and also depended on such foreign trade to sustain itself.
			Much of the ottoman trade with western europe was handled by ethnic greeks. Were active in the Ottoman Danube and Black Sea region.
		The idea of reviving ancient greek nation started to rise in late 1700's.
		Egypt was also a powerful authority now. French influence made the local power brokers act more independently from the capital.
		
Industrialization:
	The industrial revolution started in mid 1700's.
	Led to noticeable impact in middle eastern economies in this period.
	After 1815, cheap, high quality, machine-produced textiles took over the market, leaving hand-made textiles behind.
	The British forced middle eastern countries to remove their trade tariffs, enforced free trade.
	1815-1850 --> "Imperialism of Free Trade"
	1839-1842 --> Opium wars, Britain fought a war to remove trade tariffs.
	Around the same time as opium wars, Britain signed free trade treaties with Ottomans (1838) and Qajars (1841)
		In return, ottoman asked for support against rebellious local governors and the freely expanding Russia.
		"Defensive mentalism" --> "If we cannot beat them in trade, we can turn them against each other."
		Ottomans exempted some British merchants from most taxes.
		Ottomans agreed to eliminate state monopolies over production of certain goods.
		--> The british weren't trying to conquer the lands, but rather expanding their sphere of influence.
		--> Unde the free trade treaties, foreign merchants prospered in these lands. --> "Capitulation agreements."
		
		Europeans were demanding that their merchants be immune to Ottoman and Qajar taxes and laws.
		These exemptions were expanded from only European merchants, to all christian merchants
		The aim of foreign countries was to take advantage over the weakened central authority and gain resources to counter other powers.
		
		By 1850's, the christian subjects in ottoman empire could appeal to european powers to gain more concessions from the imperial authority.
	--> Middle east was being integrated to the world economy, but as a very weak position (Selling raw resources at a low price, buying european products at higher prices).
	
	Russian military successes threatened the ottoman empire
		Ottomans lost control over the northern coast of Black Sea.
		They lost the control over their vassals around Black Sea. (Romanians)
	Russians also fought Iran, conquered northern parts of the country.
	--> The ottomans and qajars saw Britain and France as a tool to use against Russian advances.
		But they still lacked the meaning of industrial advances of the west.
		
Classical liberalism 
	"There should be no distinction between ruler and the ruled"
	There should be one law which applies to every person.
	Persons had obligations to the state directly, and not through coroporate or political mediums.
	These ideas were against the existing ideologies of European and middle eastern powers.
		These ideas would become powerful weapons when adopted by strong groups.
		In Ottomans and Qajars, many groups adopted these ideas to challenge the imperial authority.
		People rose against the state to reform the power structure of both empires.
		
	Led to Greek revolts, first nationalist revolt in ottoman empire.
		They were very numerous and prosperous in the country
		They got foreign support (British, French, Russian), which was rare to come from multiple nations.
		During this period, much of the peasantry revolted as well, but these weren't necessarily nationalist. The illiterate peasants were controlled by the local intellectuals to rise against the empire with promises of reduced taxes.
		European romantic ideals played a great part in foreign support. Western powers saw greece as the base of western ideals.
		
		
Independence of Egypt:
	Ottomans started losing their power in the region between 1700's and 1800's.
	Remnants of the Mamluks had retaken partial control over the region.
	Following the seven years war, France lost all its colonial possessions to Britain. They turned to mediterranean north africa to tackle overcrowding in europe and food supply issues.
		In 1798, Napoleon invaded egypt. This undermined the mamluk authority. Ottomans cooperated with the british and russians and drove french out.
	Muhammad Ali of Egypt (1805-1848) /Mehmet Ali
		Mehmet Ali was a general who took power in Egypt and established a dynasty there.
		He was the leader of the forces who liberated egypt from the french.
		His local governance/authority was recognized by the empire.
		He let his sons and loyal servants govern the region instead of the local rulers.
		He was not a nationalist
			He preferred turkish over arabic
			His language of rule was turkish, his subjects controlled the lands.
			His bureaucrats were multilingual
		Centralized the bureaucracy and maintanied an armed force through conscription.
			Modelled the armed forces with techniques learned from the French military structure.
		Also imitated french educational strucutre
			Improvement in medicine, science, arts...
		Began sending men to Europe to learn from them + hired Europeans to come and instruct people.
		Established Egypt's first modern printing press + first modern newspaper.
		Also undertook many large-scale industrial and irrigation projects, to increase production and export to europe.
			(Cotton was prioritized, was a very important cash crop.)
			But lacked the required infrastrucutre, raw resources, skills.
			Many labourers resented the state because of forced labour.
			Most of them fled to Syria and Palestine.
		Under his rule, the state became self-sustaining and increasingly independent.
			As his economy grew stronger and army became stronger than the ottoman army, he started fighting the ottomans.
			Syria, lebanon, israel, palestine was invaded. Anatolia was invaded.
			Sudan was invaded, but with less success.
		Mahmud II asked Mehmet Ali for help in fighting rebels who occupied the region of Hijaz. Also the Greek revolt.
			Egyptian army established presence in Hijaz.
			Mehmet Ali's son demanded governorship of syria to fight in the greek revolt. Sultan offered Crete instead. Egyptian forces withdrew from Greece.
			Mehmet Ali invaded Syria instead, occupied most of the capital.
		Britain and France sided with ottomans and drove egyptians back after Mehmet Ali signed a defence treaty with the russians.
		
Tanzimat
	Pre-Tanzimat reforms:
		By this period, the structure of the empire was shaken. They were unable to defend themselves anymore. Most provinces very autonomous.
		Wished to centralize government again, but there were many who opposed it.
			Janissaries were a major threat rather than a strong military structure now.
				They had their own power bases in their regions.
				They acted independently of the crown.
				They were an armed and tax-exempt group with ruling priveleges.
			Provincial governors, mountain villages, regional princes, tribal chieftains opposed the centralization attempts.
		They wanted to reform the military to counter the foreign military advances and defend themselves.
		In 1790's, Selim attempted to create a new french-trained infantry force. (Nizam-ı Cedid - 1797)
			Composed largely of Turkish Anatolian peasants, conscripted into the army.
			Soldiers were armed and dressed like french soldiers.
			Janissaries were against this new army order. They found allies in other ruling families, who were against foreign influence in the government. Ulema had larger interests in supporting the Janissaries.
			Istanbul Janissaries revolted and overthrew Selim.
		In comparison, Mehmet Ali did not face much opposition as the remnants of the janissaries were weakened by the french.
		Mahmud II also wanted to renew his father's innovations, but waited to avoid opposition by the janissaries.
			Janissaries continued to under-achive, especially during the greek revolt. This was a humiliation to the empire.
			Mahmud II gained increased support to implement a better-structured army.
			On 1807, Mahmud bombarded the Janissaries with the help of loyal troops. Janissaries were declared as un-islamic.
				Janissaries were a part of the Bektashi sufist order, which was regarded as a heretic order as the order was developed in the balkans and had western elements in it.
			Following the end of Janissaries, military was westernized rapidly. These reforms led to further reforms in many areas.
				Military officers were required to know french too. Later, they were inspired by Germany.
		In this period, many western technical and administrative manuals were brought to the empire. This led to faster scientific and administrative innovations.
		A common dress code was established for all government offices.
	Tanzimat (#1:1839, #2:1856-just after crimean war):
		Everyone has equal protection of the state, and are equal in front of law.
		Rather than religious-based citizenship, a common ottoman citizenship was established.
		Mahmud II recognized that the state needed different ways to claim legitimacy. The new ideology was proposed to counter nationalism.
		The common citizenship led to a rise of "Ottomanism" (which never got a lot of support), which was not national, but promoted unity in the empire.
		There was opposition from conservative members, but they were circumvented by timing of reforms.
		These reforms gave the state a modern bureaucratic structure.
		
	Russians agitated most christian nations, they rose against the empire.
		As a response to this, turkish elites abandoned "Ottomanism" and adopted a turkish nationalism.
		
		
Iran:
	Iran's contact with europe was mostly with Russia and Britain, but this was made mainly to get them to foil each other's plans
		This was done because they were at a disadvantage.
		The interactions with nations were balanced between european nations to prevent one from gaining too much power
		They signed free trade agreements with european powers.
		--> a group of merchants who benefited from the trade rose in power.
	Iranian merchants and artisans were unhappy about the foreign competition.
		Iranian silk market almost diseappeared
		Carped weaving developed instead, with rising european demand for products.
	France and Britain wanted to counter Russian advances in central asia, they supported a stronger Qajar rule.
	Nasir ad-Din Shah (1848-1896)
		Made reforms, inspired by the ottoman Tanzimat reforms.
			Was less effective than in Ottoman empire.
				Pastoral nomads were too numerous and independent
				The empire was heavily decentralized
				Ulema had no interest in strengthening central authority, they had too much power in the country.
			Military reforms were very limited.
			Schooling system was reformed? (Dar al-Fanun -1851)
			Tehran was modernized, but was centered around the emperor.
	These reforms did not last long. 