HIS384 Lecture 8 (30 Okt 2019)

-------------------------------
Sweden and Denmark:
	While Sweden was at war in Poland, Denmark attacked Sweden to reunite the nations.
	The Swedes marched across the Sound and defeated Denmark, retaking Scania.
	The Danish king Frederik III saw that autonomous noblemen were not good for the country. He removed the tax exemption of noblemen and established a hereditary, non-elected monarchy.
		~1660 is a milestone in Danish history because it is the start of absolutism in the region.
			-> Monarchs centralizing authority in their hands and reducing the autonomy of nobility.
			-> Noblemen became advisors rather than powerful rulers.
			It was significant because it was one of the first in Europe and became a mode for Sweden and others.
	Sweden was run by regency during the first 12 years of Charles XI's rule. The wars with Denmark were before and around this period.
		Charles XI strengthened the power of the crown. He had an audit of the regency period because the treasury was empty when he started his rule.
			The crown lands had shrunk as well as their income, but the nobility was doing well.
			After getting the results of the audit, he demanded that the nobility pay it back, which was done by confiscating land from the nobility. -> Taking back the lands that were given to them as a gift to their services. After doing this the government recovered their losses.
			By pursuing this policy, the nobility was forced to bend to his will.
		All of the absolutist policies were applied to Swedish colonies (local, not overseas) as well.
			The ideas were resisted by the existing nobility in the colonial provinces (mainly in Estonia and Livonia). In Livonia, noblemen lost up to 80% of their property. This gave Sweden a larger income from the region.
			The German nobility in Livonia protested against these policies. One of the Baltic German leaders protested to the king and was given a death sentence. He fled and became one of the leaders of an alliance against the Swedes that took part in the Great Northern War.
				-> By trying to squeeze more income out of the overseas provinces, they lost their rule in the Baltic Sea region.
				*Nowadays, of all the periods under foreign rule, the only one looked upon favourably was the Swedish rule because the nobility's control over the land was restricted and the German noblemen wanted to establish serfdom.
					The Swedes also established schools in the local languages to educate the people.
					Before the Swedes took over, there were many wars and most of the fighting took place in the region.
					After the Swedes left, there was plague, famine and the Russians reestablished serfdom.
				The king had also abolished serfdom in Estonia and Livonia in the 1690's. This didn't have much effect since they lost the region a few years later. Their main aim was to make the empire more efficient, though, and not the needs of the people.
	In order to avoid the problems of regency, Charles XII became a ruler at the age of 15 without regency.
		This was better for the empire because Sweden was surrounded by great powers
			Muscovy (Russia), Denmark, Norway and Poland-Lithuania allied to roll back the Swedish hegemony in the region. They also thought that since the king was very young, it would be easy to defeat the Swedes.
			The Livonian German in exile was the person behind this alliance. He travelled from capital to capital to convince them.
				Lithuania -> Livonia
				Russia -> Ingria
				Denmark -> Scania and nearby German lands.
			It should be noted that nearly all empires had a change of leadership around the same time Charles XII became king.
				Poland-Lithuania -> Augustus II (Elector of Sachsen) became the king without giving up his former rule. 
					He still focused on the affairs in Dresden.
					He managed Poland-Lithuania without listening to the advice of the Polish noblemen.
					He used only Saxon troops 
				Russia -> Peter I "The Great"
					He forced the empire to modernize/westernize.
					Made the noblemen dress in Western (mainly Dutch) clothing
					Implemented a beard tax to change the appearance of the people
					In 1697, he had an incognito tour of Europe to learn from the Western nations (also to gather allies against the Ottomans). He mainly studied with the Dutch. He and his people learned shipbuilding in Amsterdam.
						Russia was a landlocked country at the time, surrounded by empires with strong navies. He wanted to have a strong navy to defend Russian interests.
					He also wanted to have a Western type of government because it was more efficient than what Russia had the time.
						Sweden was a great example of an efficient government type for him.
						Military reforms were also important, mainly logistics.
					He also brought the church under the government rule
					Created the table of ranks, which is the idea that the nobility and state servants should be given a rank according to their service and merit rather than as birthright.
					*His rule was rather brutal and a lot of people got killed along the way.
						The old believers saw him as the Antichrist because of his policies.
						They also see him as an enemy of the Slavic culture. He forced people to follow a foreign culture, which wasn't welcomed by most people.
				Denmark -> Frederik IV
Great Northern War:
	Charles XI was actively involved in the war.
		He did not return to Stockholm for a majority of the war.
		Because the Swedish government was established to be efficient and independent from the king, everything was managed well by the centralized management and logistics was not a major problem.
	Seeing that the empires were allying against Sweden, Sweden saw that the best option was to strike first.
		They attacked Denmark and captured Copenhagen in two weeks. Denmark was out of the war after that.
		After that, they went to Narva to meet the Russians at Narva.
			The Russians expected the Swedes to have a slow response, so they expected to win because of their numerical advantage. Sweden surprised them by attacking immediately and forced them to withdraw.
			This was an opportunity for Peter to learn from Swedish tactics and improve it.
		After the battle at Narva, Sweden went south to Riga to fight the Poles, who first started the war by besieging Riga. They were forced to retreat and Swedes chased the Polish and Russian troops across the empires.
			Charles XII planned to replace the Polish king Augustus II with an allied noblemen. There were many candidates. In 1704, the Polish nobles elected Stanislav Leszczynski and deposed Augustus II.
			Augustus II went back to Dresden, but returned when Charles was defeated.
		While Sweden was busy with Poland-Lithuania, the Russians regrouped and returned with a better and stronger Russian army. They attacked Narva when the Swedes were away and captured the city.
			In 1708, Sweden focused on Russia again. They had captured Swedish territories while Sweden was busy in Poland.
			While Sweden was diverted, Russia prepared for a scorched earth war.
			Because of the scorched earth policy followed by the Russians, Swedes had to rely on supply convoys, which were easily intercepted by the Russians. They lost a majority of their men while they were heading south in Ukraine.
			Sweden was relying on an alliance with the Cossacks, who were not happy with the Russian rule. Together, they fought in the Battle of Poltava in 1709 and they were defeated.
				-> This battle marks the end of the Swedish Empire, and the start of the Russian influence as a great power in European politics.
			Charles was forced into an exile in the Ottoman Empire, in Moldova, for 5 years.
		Russians took over Estonia and Livonia while Charles was in exile.
		Augustus II regained control of Poland-Lithuania after the battle of Poltava.
		Denmark also started fighting Sweden to take back lands.
	When Charles XII returned from exile, he led the Swedish troops to fight Danes in Norway.
		He was shot in the head when he was inspecting the troops in the region. It is unknown who did it or why.
		The war with Denmark was going in his favour at that point.
	Charles XII was childless, a new ruler was put in place, ending decades of absolutism.
		The Russians overran Finland in this period and forced Sweden to sign a peace treaty in Nystad (Finland), forcing them to give up all overseas territories around Russia.
		
Peter I, continued:
	Near the end of the war, Peter inspected the land at the mouth of the Narva river, and constructed the city of St. Petersburg at the land in the occupied Swedish territory.
		He designed this city to be the new capital of the empire. He forced all noblemen to move to the city.
			To help with the development of the city, Peter banned the construction of stone buildings outside the capital, forcing all stonemasons to move to the city and help with the development
			This city was also an opportunity to westernize further and help with foreign trade.
		The city of Kronshtadt was established as a naval base to protect the capital.
		Architects from other parts of Europe were brought to St. Petersburg to improve the architecture and even surpass them in design.
		The empire learned trade and shipbuilding techniques from the Dutch and tried to be better than than them.
	When Peter took over, the knights, nobles and other local elites pledged their allegiance to Peter.
		He was remarkably generous to the local nobles, burghers and merchants. He saw tham as a very valuable human resource because these people could help him modernize the empire.
			These people were protestants who had been living in this region for decades/centuries
			Most of them had also been educated in European schools and had learned from them.
		To gain their loyalty, Peter respected their language and religion, as well as local administrative autonomy of the local noblemen and knights.
			A registry was established to follow who belonged to which family or what group of knights. This was referred to when trying to decide who has what rights.
			Russia also defended these people against newcomers, such as Russian noblemen.
			Any land (and peasants) that was taken back by Charles XII was returned to these noblemen and they were free to impose serfdom.
				Peasants were bound to their land, and their rules of servitude were more strict than ever.
		The local noblemen were left to make all decisions all the region while Russia handled foreign affairs and military operations.
			These people took advantage of this and got major government positions up until the end of the empire.
			By 18th century - early 19th century, there was a disproportionate amount of Baltic Germans in government offices and Russian military.
	After Peter's time, French became the new court language and the rulers had European ancestry rather than purely Russian ancestry.
	
Sweden, continued:
	Sweden declined after the Great Northern War.
		There were two major factions:
			The nobility took back the power they lost in the earlier decades. They were known as the Caps
			There were also people who still believed in an alliance with the French, and wanted to follow the earlier ways. They were known as the Hats.
			The Hats were responsible for a disastrous war against the Russians while the Caps proposed press liberty.
	This was known as the Age of Liberty.
		They passed the world's first freedom of press act. They removed censorship, both from internal and external sources.
		They also passed bills requiring all documents to be public, something implemented in other countries in recent decades.
		
Rise of Prussia:
	Prussia and Brandenburg were ruled by the same dynasty, but they were distant lands, separated by Poland.
	Because there were no kings in the HRE, the Prussian ruler was never called a king. Because Prussian lands were outside of the HRE, though, they were called kings there.
	When the lands were united again, they could call themselves kings.
	Frederick William established the form of Enlightened Absolutism.
		He was a man of arts and was educated in that.
		He also established a strong rule in Prussia, backed by a strong army trained in the Swedish system.
	Frederick II established a strong a well trained army. During the Seven Years' War, Prussia fought all major European powers while Britain fought at sea.
		Prussia did well at the start of the war but later lost to Russians and Berlin was occupied by Russians. They only left when the empress Elizabeth died and his successor, Peter III withdrew from Prussia.
		Peter III was deposed in a coup by his wife, Catherine.
		
Rise of Prussia timeline (part of):
	1657: Ducal Prussia granted sovereignty by Polish King
	1701: Frederick 'King *in* Prussia'
	1713-40: Frederick William, 'The Soldier King' creates a strong army
	1740: Frederick II (The Great) attacks Ausria to gain Silesia
	1756-63: Seven Year's War. Prussia + England vs. Austria + France + Sweden + Russia + Spain.
	1772: Initiates first partition of Poland. Prussia and Brandenburg is connected. Upgrades title to 'King *of* Prussia'.
	1786: Frederick the Great dies, succeeded by nephew Frederick William III