HIS384 Lecture 1 (11 Sep 2019)

Introduction?
-------------------------------
* For the purpose of this course, the "Baltic Region" will cover all countries around the Baltic Sea rather than the B3.
	- Scandinavia
	- Germany
	- Poland
	- NW Russia
	- B3
	* Not Iceland
	
The term "Baltic" was derived from the word "Belt", referring to it as a belt streching across the region (From Denmark/Sweden to Gulf of Finland).
	Also called "The East Sea", or "Ostsee / Eastern Sea" by the Hanza / Dutch. Estonians call it the West Sea instead.
	Like the other trade companies in GB, there was an East Land Company, which focused in trade with this region.

With the activity of the Hanza (~1300s), there was an exchange of culture, language and people in the region.
	When Russians and Swedes expanded, however, the activities of the Hanza was reduced.


-------------------------------
The Viking Era
-------------------------------
The word "Viking" originated from the Old Norse word for the same action, which meant going on a seaborne raid.
	It was later used by the christian scholars to refer to their barbaric activities, and generalized the people of the region.
	A more accurate term for the people as a whole could be "Norsemen", but it is now used to refer to the people of Norway.
The people of this region did not record their histories at the time, so they were not included in the history keeping of Romans/Europeans until they were christianized.
	The wave of christianization moved north, through Scandinavia, then north through Russia, and finally the Baltic states (Lithuania was last, converted in 1300's)
The dates of the era are vaguely set because there was Viking activity before and after the era.
	It is generally agreed to ~800-1000 AD, but can be expanded to 750-1066.

The Vikings were generally seen as supersized, brutal, heroic, ferocious people. The Christian texts record them as brutal and filthy barbarians.
Late 8th century is generally seen as the start of this era because the Vikings came up with their new longboat design around this time.
	This boat was suited for long sea voyages. They could also sail up rivers, land on beaches and then quickly get out before the victims managed to call for help.
	They also used sunstones to help with navigation.
	The Vikings showed up in Britain without any warning and started slaughtering monks. They were seen as the scourge of god.
	They invaded Northumbria and conquered York. It was their base of operations in the region.
		The local kingdoms paid the norsemen periodically to be left alone.
		Their rule was called the Dane Law. It was a norse rule in general than specifically a Danish rule
	The peak of their rule was under Canute, who became the king of England and then of Denmark and Norway, uniting them in a North Sea Empire. After his death, the region fell apart because of the rivalries in the region.
One explanation for the start of the Viking era is believed to be a population boom, forcing people to relocate and live off pillaging.
	Another explanation is that during the dark ages most of Europe was weakly ruled, and the Vikings took advantage of this state.
	During this period many Vikings conquered regions and took over, but they took over the local customs and religions and then became a rather local ruler. The only exception is Iceland, which was conquered and converted.
Battle of Stamford Bridge on 1066 is seen as the end of the Viking era. The Vikings defeated the English, but were later defeated by William the Conqueror during the Norman invasion.
	This is the last serious attempt by Vikings to conquer other territory.
	By that time, various kingdoms in the North were also christianized, so it makes choosing this time more convenient.
	Christianization happened first in Denmark at the end of 900s, then in Sweden and Norway at the beginning of 1000s.
	St. Ansgar was the first archbishop to be sent to the region and he focused on managing and convering the people there.
Christianity served as a reason for the kings to promote their power and authority over other rival rulers and bring the region under their rulership.

When Scandinavia was christianized, the Viking activities started originating from the Baltic states instead, often targeting the christianized kingdoms of the region.
	Denmark continued this tradition later on, going east and notheast.

The Norse were the first people to cross the sea to England, but they also explored and settled the Faroe Islands, Iceland, Greenland and Newfoundland.
	The names of the regions were rather used as a marketing trick. - Greenland & Vinland
	They also founded the city of Dublin.

The Slavic and Ugric people in Russian lands invited the Vikings to become rulers and bring stability to the region.
	Rurik became the ruler of Novgorod, then followed the Dnepr down to found Kiev. The Rurik Dynasty ruled the Russian nations for a long time.
		It is believed that the word "Rus" in Kievan Rus comes from the word "Ruotsi", which was used to refer to the Swedes by the tribes of Scandinavia.
		They lasted until the Mongol invasions in 1330.
	St. Vladimir accepted to convert to Orthodox Christianity in 988 AD and helped convert the Kievan Rus to christianity.
	The Varangians followed the water ways down to the Black Sea, then got to Constantinople.
	Another group followed the Volga to the Caspian Sea to reach the silk road.
		They esablished themselves in the region to demand protection money from the people.

-------------------------------
Other people of the region at the time
-------------------------------
In addition to the Norse, there were the Lapps, Finns, Latvians.
Later on, when the crusades failed to achieve their goals, the former crusaders have decided to focus on the Baltic region. Their main reason was offering protection to Christian merchants and scholars. (To be further detailed in the next lecture.)
