HIS384 Lecture 7 (23 Okt 2019)

Sweden?
-------------------------------
Gustav II Adolf
	He led his troops in the Thirty Years' War. Died on the battlefield in 1632.
		After he died, Sweden did not do very well in the war.
	He was known as the Lion of the North because of his contribution in the war.
	Habsburgs, on the other hand, called him the Snow King, treating him as someone not to be feared.
	Prior to Swedish intervention, Denmark had joined the war to help Germans, but it was disastrous for them.
	His army was transported to Peenemuende in 6 weeks, which was a large achievement at the time. The Swedes were successful because of their tactics and logistical advantage.
		Gustav Adolf was a great commander, but the administrative system in Sweden helped him a lot.
		While he was busy in the field, Sweden was managed by the administrators, who managed the country efficiently after his death as well.

Axel Oxenstierna
	He was the chancellor of Sweden between 1612 and 1654
	He was the mastermind behind the administrative reforms in Sweden at the time.
	While Gustav II Adolf was busy fighting the Habsburgs, he managed the country without any issues. He made sure the king's death did not change the way things were run in the empire.
		After the king died, he worked with the French and formed a weak alliance
		The French were catholic, but they were against the Habsburgs, so they supported the Swedes.
		At the end of the war, Oxenstierna was a part of the Treaty of Westphalia, and managed to acquire land in north Germany as a part of the treaty.
	He continued as the regent until Christina became a ruler.

Queen Christina of Sweden
	She wanted to become a catholic, but the Swedish nobility was against it since Sweden was independent because of the reformation and they had recently fought in the Thirty Years' War.
	She abdicated the throne in 1654 and left the country.
	
There is a divided opinion on whether Sweden's expansion was to support their economy or ensure their security.
	The security argument is stronger. Sweden was surrounded by states that were against their existence, so they had to strike their enemies first to make sure they did not become a big threat.
		Poland wanted to reclaim Sweden, after losing it to Charles IX
		Russia was expanding at the time and they weren't friendly towards Sweden
		Denmark used to rule over Sweden and wanted to bring them back into their union again.
	There is another idea that poverty drove Sweden to become more militarized and expand.
		The other states depended on hiring mercenaries, but Sweden was too poor for that.
		Sweden became the first nation to centralize conscription and use it to form their army.
			It was previously done in Europe, but management was decentralized and done at a small scale before.
			Conscription had a lower risk for Sweden because it wouldn't be too expensive for the state if they lost a war.
		Because the crown had taken the land owned by churches and monasteries, they could use it as payment for nobles who took part in their military. Local noblemen were poor, so it was a good deal for them.
		And important point in the conscription rule was that it was not forced. The King persuaded noblemen and others by promising them gains for signing up.
			This was unlike the rest of Europe, where there was a fight for power between the king and noblemen.
			His choice of chancellor (Axel Oxenstierna) also helped him bring the noblemen under his control.

Innovatons and Administrative Reforms
	Innovations:
		There are questions whether he came up with these or borrowed them from the Dutch.
		Employing well drilled units that were flexible in their formations.
		The army lived off the land. They came from a sparsely populated area and they could get supplies from the region they were in. They also recruited from the area they were active in.
		The ability to sustain an aggressive overseas war for an extended period.
			Local recruits and supplies helped them with that.
	Reforms:
		Riksdag (Diet) ordinance of 1617
			Four estates:
				Nobility
				Clergy
				Burghers
				Peasants
			High nobility form a council, headed by Lord Chancellor, apart from Riksdag
			* The idea existed before the time, but it was not a clearly defined structure.
			* Over time, it evolved into the way Riksdag is now.
		Swedish Form of Government Act of 1634
			Done after the king's death in 1632
			First professional centralized administration system.
			Ministries (colleges):
				Supreme court (1614)
				Treasury
				War
				Admiralty
				Mining -> Sweden was poor, but they had rich iron and copper reserves. This helped Sweden become more competent in manufacturing better arms and export them.
				Commerce (1651)
		In this period, offices were assigned to locals (Swedes) rather than foreign noblemen. Offices were awarded by merit rather than as birthright.
			This led to salaried bureaucracy.
			Offices were permanent and there were set times and places for meetings.
			The officials were more competent. Because of that, the authority came with the office; it wasn't given to a man. Ministers had power and influence over their office's affairs and nothing else.
			Central government worked closely with local governments, giving them clear instructions on what needs to be done.
			-> This led to a lack of human resources. Swedish nobility had to be trained quickly to fit in this system.
				Schools were established to train these people.

Cossacks
	Nomadic people. They took part of marauding, crime, slave trade.
	They caused trouble wherever they went in the region.
	They refused to yield to any nobility. They thought that the nobility did not serve their interests, so they rebelled against the Polish-Lithuanian state.
	The Cossacks turned to the Tsar for protection. They saw that as a temporary alliance but Muscovy saw that as a permanent deal and saw it as a reason to take over Ukraine.
	
Poland - Lithuania:
	During the war with the Muscovites and Swedes, Prussians also joined in and supported the Swedes
		Prussia broke free from the union in 1657.
		They asked Poland for sovereignty. This was not a big loss for Poland at the time, but over time, Prussia became a powerful empire and took over parts of Poland.
	Most major cities in the union was occupied
	The peasants rose against the occupying forces and pushed them out of their lands.
		It was seen as a religious war by the locals since the invaders were Protestant and Orthodox.
	They lost parts of Belarus and Ukraine to Muscovites.
	Compared to the surrounding states, Poland had many noblemen with extensive powers and the king had little authority. This prevented the king from raising taxes and organizing the kingdom's military to defend against invasions better.
	King John III Soieski led the relief of christian forces when Ottoman forces besieged Vienna in 1683. Aside from that, he wasn't very successful since as king he still had almost no power.
	
Sweden and Denmark:
	While Sweden was fighting in Poland, Denmark decided to attack them to reform the union.
	When the Sound froze, the Swedish army marched from north Germany, through Denmark and to Copenhagen through the Sound.
	

Poland-Lithuania Timeline
	1648: Cossack uprising in Ukraine
	1654: Treaty of Pereiaslav, Cossacks accept protection by Tsar
	1654-67: Thirteen Years' War - Poland-Lithuania vs. Muscovy
	1655: Muscovites invade Lithuania, Swedes invade Poland -> 'Deluge': Muscovites sack Vilnius, Swedes occupy Krakow.
		  Act of Kedainiai creates Lithuanian-Swedish union
	1657: Brandenburg given sovereignty over Ducal Prussia.
	1658: Poles and Lithuanians drive out the invaders.
	1660: Peace of Oliva between Poland and Sweden. Status quo ante bellum restored.
	1667: Peace of Andrusovo - Poland cedes Kiev to Muscovy
	1668: John Casimir, last Vasa (Waza) king of Poland abdicates
	1674-96: Reign of John (Jan) III Sobieski
	
Danish-Swedish Wars
	Northern Seven Years' War, 1563-70
	Kalmar War, 1611-13
	Torstenssons' War, 1643-45 -> SWE got Oesel & Gotland
	Second Northern War, 1657-58 -> DEN attacked, Karl X marched across ice, DEN lost Scania
	Second Northern War, 1658-60 -> Karl X attacked to eliminate the Danes, Dutch fleet saved Copenhagen
	Scanian War, 1675-79 -> DEN failed to recover Scania
	Great Northern War (1), 1700
	Great Northern War (2), 1709-20