HIS384 Lecture 4 (02 Okt 2019)

The Hanza
-------------------------------
The word Hanza (Hanse) comes from old German, meaning it is a union.
It is the union of individual trading companies focusing on trade in the region, as far as the Russian cities.
They first started in Luebeck, but established their presence in other cities.
	One of their major trading centres was in Visby, in Gotland.
	They also had access to Novgorod, which gave them access to the Russian market.
	They were given rights by cities to operate extensively.
	At their peak, they were present in over 200 cities.
At first, there were multiple individual groups of merchants that operated in their respective regions.
	By 1400's, they united to form a larger league. They came together in Luebeck to make decisions.
		Because it was the de facto capital of the league, Luebeck became a significant city in terms of wealth and military capabilities.
		At a point, the Hanza had their own military to protect their interests.
	They cooperated to get more benefits from local administrations and reduce customs duties and taxes.
	Denmark wasn't only a competitor of Hanza, but they were also at war with the league multiple times.
	Low German was their common language and because they ruled the cities they were active in, the official language in those cities were also Low German.
		They also brought their cultures and laws to the regions they were active in.
		There were strong familiar connections between the merchants in various cities.
		A majority of art works in the regions were produced by the local Germans.
		The red/brown brick architecture in these cities was spread as a result of Hanseatic trade.
	They had influence over local rulers. For example, they were able to force the rulers in an Estonian island to build a lighthouse for local trade.
	Because the Hanseatic traders did not use compasses, they built very tall buildings to act as landmarks in the cities they worked in to support the trade.
		This also showed their affluence to the people of the region.
The biggest advantage that the Hanza had was the Cog, a flat-keeled ship that was meant to sail upriver and maximize the amount of goods carried.
	The Hanseatic shipyards of Luebeck and Danzig dominated the market for building cogs.
	Their advantage lasted until the Dutch started building better ships and became more actively involved in trading (16th century).
Danzig
	Initially it was under the control of Teutons
	It was later ruled by Poland. It was the biggest city in the kingdom at the time.
Riga
	The first city on the eastern Baltic to become a hanseatic city.
	The city later prospered as the Hanza started declining.
The Hansa had 4 main offices in foreign lands (Kontors)
	Novgorod
	London
	Bruges
	Bergen
Guilds
	With the expansion of Hansa, guilds became more strongly organized.
	People who wanted to work in a profession had to be a part of a guild for training and benefits
	The guild members had probably started the christmas celebrations in the Hanseatic cities.
		Those who started it were members of the blackhead guild, named after their saint who was African.
	The Great Guilds elected officials, who formed their oligarchy. They ruled over the local peasants, the Undeutsch.
		The peasants could take part in the trades, but they were not allowed to be a part of the merchant class.
		Cities where the guilds operated were also structured so that the peasants would not be given a chance to advance, and they would have to acknowledge the upper class.
	
Trade:
	Eastwards:
		Metals, Metal products
		Salt (one of the most important products for mass consumption, produced in Lueneburg, near Luebeck. Latre on, they started producing it in the Bay of Biscay)
		Wool, textiles (Mainly from the Low Countries, England)
		Wine
		Beer (Both east and west)
		Spices
		Luxury goods
	Westwards:
		Grain (mainly from Poland since they were very active and the population in the West was booming)
		Fur/pelts/skins (from the north and the east)
		Naval supplies (tar, lumber, hemp. Very important in the west until they start building steel ships in 1800's)
		Beeswax, honey
		Dried/salted fish (herring, cod)
		Flax
		Amber
		
		
Notes on Teutons and Livonians
	The Teutons were very good at conquering the region, but they were not as good at spreading the religion there.
		Population was very thin, so churches had to cover very large areas.
		They also did not have a large income, so they had difficulty bringing priests from northern Germany
		As a response, they had wandering monks who would go around spreading the word. With the Protestant reformation, the monasteries were abandoned and monks left.
		
Scandinavia in the middle ages.
	Oresund, the narrowest part of the passage between the Baltic Sea and the North Sea, was under the control of Danes on both sides.
	The traders in the region had to pass through the sound to go between seas.
		The traders would have to stop at Kronborg (Elsinore) to pay tariffs, which would be 1-2% of total value. If they undervalued their goods, the king would have the right to purchase everything.
		This was a major source of income for Denmark
		
	
Kalmar Union
	Covered all of Scandinavia, plus parts of Karelia, Iceland, Greenland and islands on the North Sea.
	Had control over Schleswig, which led to conflicts about the ownership of the province.

Timeline:
	Hanza:
		1159: Founding of Luebeck
		1226: Luebeck becomes a free imperial city
		1282: Riga becomes a hanseatic city
		1303: Carta mercatoria, exemption from new levies, Edward III of England
		1358: 1st Diet of Hanseatic League Cities in Luebeck
		1370: Treaty of Stralsund, hanseatic victory over Denmark
		1429: Denmark imposes Sound Tolls
		1494: Novgorod Kontor closed by Ivan III
		1500's: The Hanza appoints a chief executive officer to slow down the decline of the institution
				Slow decline, losing to Dutch competition
		1598: Expelled from London by Queen Elizabeth. (By that time the English had established their own eastland trading company)
	Medieval Livonia:
		1182: Riga becomes a hanseatic city
		1343-45: Estonian uprising
		1346: Danes sell Estonia to the Teutonic Order
		1366: Archbishop of Riga loses suzerainty over the Livonian possessions.
			Disagreements between Riga and the Teutons, to a point where the christians in Riga supported the pagan towns in Lithuania against the Teutons.
			Teutons sought help from Vatican.
		1422: First Landtag (national assembly) at Walk.
			Had 4 estates: bishops, knights, Order, towns.
			The estates cooperated with each other to defend themselves against the other estates, which they were always in conflict with to defend their interests.
		1424: Landtag decides fleeing peasants must be returned
			If they escape from the land owner's estate, they must be returned.
			At the time, cities were thought to help people become free, if they could lay low, work and stay hidden for a year. That's why they attracted so many of the peasants.
		1435: Livonian confederation formed
		1507: Free peasants are no longer allowed to bear arms - a step towards serfdom.
	Medieval Scandinavia:
		1227: Valdemar II is defeated, end of Danish expansion in NE Germany
			He tried to prtition the region between 4 sons. This was disastrous.
		1346: Denmark sells Estonia to Teutonic Order
			The Danish state was in great debt, needed the money desperately. sold for 19 tons of silver.
		1350: Bubonic plague
		1370: Treaty of Stralsund, hanseatic victory over Denmark
		1380: Danish king Olaf IV Haakonsson inherits Norwegian crown (held until 1814)
		1388: Olaf IV's mother, Queen Margaret of Denmark and Norway given Swedish crown
		1397: Kalmar Union: Margaret's nephew Erik of Pomerania crowned king.
			King Erik III in Norway, Erik VII in Denmark, Erik XIII Sweden.
	Kalmar Union:
		1429: Sound toll introduced
		1434: Swedish rebellion against the Danes
			The rule wasn't centralized, but many nobles in Sweden were in conflict with the king.
		1438: Erik is replaced with nephew Christopher as king, but noble councils have the right to rule in all three kingdoms.
		1448: Christian I of Oldenburg elected king of Denmark. Dynasty ruled until 1863
		1471: Swedish regent Sten Sturre defeats Christian near Stockholm
			Represented as the King slaying a dragon in the same way as St. George.
		1474: ?