HIS384 Lecture 2 (18 Sep 2019)

The Baltic Crusade, civilization of Baltic region
-------------------------------
Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony established a the first German town on the Baltic shores in Luebeck. It served as the launching port for the northern crusades.
	At this point the northernmost archbishopries were those of Hamburg/Bremen. They covered the Scandinavian expansion.
	When Luebeck was founded, it served as the new base of expansion.
	The town of Visby on Gotland became aa major trading town in the region.
		Pilgrims originated from Visby and landed near Riga, establishing the town of Uxkull.
		Many other missionaries, pilgrims, traders and crusaders followed soon after.
			* Merchants, most of which were Germanic and Slavic were already very active in the region at the time. The orthodox christian merchants from the Kievan Rus did not try to spread their religion.
		The Livs (finnic speaking people in the Gulf of Riga) were encountered by the missionaries and the missionaries tried to convert them in exchange for protection against their neighbours, the Lithuanians.
			They brought materials from the mainland and started building stone buildings for protection.
			The expected payment was conversion to christianity and then paying taxes to the church. The Livs later refused to do that.
			The first bishop to be assigned for the region was Meinhard. He failed.
		The tribes living on Oesel and the Kursi (just south of Oesel) were still actively participating in raids on Sweden at the time, so they were regarded as the fiercest pirates. They would end up resisting the crusaders.

The archbishops, kings and crusader orders in the region asked for a papal directive to direct their efforts on the baltic region.
	Sure, this cold and barbaric land was not considered as glorious as retaking the holy land, but the region was much closer to the christian regions and had access to major waterways that went across the continent.
	^ This is also why most of the crusader movements started landing at and expanding from the region of Riga and followed the nearby river.
At the end of the 10th century, while the Scandinavian people were converting to christianity, Poland was united and they eventually decided to convert as well.
	Some other locations to the east were also starting to convert to orthodox christianity.
	Therefore, the baltic states region was almost surrounded by christian states.

Seeing that the conversion efforts were not effective, the German knights under the command of Bertolt went to the region and tried to spread the religion by force by burning down the villages of those who refused.
	Albert von Buxhoeveden was appointed the bishop of the region.
		Before leaving for the region, he got the support of HRE.
		He built upon the efforts of his predecessors. He justified his crusade as an action to protect the merchants and pilgrims in the region against the pagans.
			* Even though the crusade had the support of the pope, the Holy Roman Emperor at the time was rather a rival of the pope in terms of influence.
		In order to market the idea of crusade, Albert named the region Terra Mariana. This attracted some knights
	The expedition noticed that the town of Uxkull was not at a very suitable location, so they established Riga, which would eventually become one of the largest cities in Riga.
	In order to expand their efforts, Albert started recruiting people to go on a crusade during the summers, and they would go back in fall.
		This was not a very sustainable effort and it was noticed quickly.
		To have a permanent order, Albert set up his private order called the Swordbrothers, made up of religiously devoted knights who are professional fighters.
			The Swordbrothers were offered 1/3 of the land they conquered, so they were especially motivated to expand in the region.
		They managed to convert the Livonians, partly by sending their leader to Rome to meet the pope, and he is used to convert the Livonians to the cause.
		Once the Livs were converted, the Latgali, who were already under threat of the Russians and the viking raids, saw the christians as allies, and joined them for protection.
		Later on, the crusaders started heading north. Because the Estonians were not closely organized, they were used by the Swordbrothers to have the chiefs fight each other and have some of them convert at the time.
			The fighting between tribes was also reduced and eventually stopped when everyone was christianized.
		The final fight against the Estonians happened in Oesel, by christian and converted tribal armies in winter.
			After the successful siege and defeat of Estonians, they converted to christianity.

While the Germanic crusades were taking place, the Danish King, Valdemar II decided to join the efforts.
	The Danes landed around the location of Talinn.
	Even though the tribes did not respond quickly, they were assembling to repel the Danish invasion.
	The Danes were about to be overrun, but they eventually defeated the tribes.
		This battle is also believed to be the origin of the Danish flag, which is the oldest state flag at the time.
	Northern Estonia was conquered by Danes, they could not stay there for long.
The Swedes attempted to follow the Danes to Estonia later, but they were repelled by the Estonians, so they did not try again.
	Estonians would have preferred this to succeed since the German rule resulted in a long period of serfdom in the region, but it is not a major concept in the Swedish culture.

The principalities of Pskov and Novgorod were also somewhat involved in these activities.
	The crusaders saw the orthodox christians as competitors, though, so one of their motivations was to recover this territory before the Russians did.
	During the course of crusades, the Russians took part in both sides of the conflict. They would sometimes raid the tribes and at other times they would ally with the tribes against the crusaders.
	
* Even though the temporary reinforcements were active in summer, the local crusaders preferred to work in winter because the forests, marshes and other land features of the region in summer favoured the tribes. Because of that, they fought in winter where it was easier to navigate and detect ambushes.

About 10 years later, the Swordbrothers turned south to fight the Estonians, but they were annihilated.
	They later became the Livonian branch of the Teutonic Knights

-------------------------------
The Teutonic Knights
-------------------------------
The Teutonic Knights were already present when the Swordbrothers were active.
	The pilgrims and crusaders from Germany landed where the Prussian tribes were.
		The Prussians had one valuable resource, Amber.
		They were also a very militant Pagan tribe that fought the Poles from time to time.
The Poles invited the Teutonic Knights to the region for help in deaking with the Prussians. With Pope's blessings, the Poles gave the Teutonic Knights land to start their operations in.
	The Teutonic Knights had a relatively easy time because the Prussians weren't as active anymore. The recent migrations of the Germans had pushed the Prussians away.
	The few uprisings of the Prussians were put down by the Knights.
Almost all of Estonia and Latvia was brought together by the Teutonic Knights
	The Danes sold Estonia to the order.
The last grandmaster of the Teutonic Order later became the duke of Prussia.

-------------------------------
Lithuania
-------------------------------
Unlike the Latvian, Estonian and Prussian tribes, the Lithuanians were brought toether by King Mindaugas and established a new Lithuanian state.
Neither the Swordbrothers nor the Teutonic Knights could defeat the united Lithuania.


-------------------------------
The Russians
-------------------------------
The Teutons and Swedes decided to move east against Novgorod.
	At the time the Mongols had wiped out the Kievan Rus. Novgorod was the only state that was not conquered.
	Since the orthodox christian Russian states were subjugated, the catholic rulers thought it wouldn't be too difficult to take the remaining states.
	The Teutonic Knights conquered Pskov.
	They also fought Novgorod, but they were defeated at Narva -> Duke Alexander was called Alexander Nevsky after his victory.