HIS384 Lecture 6 (16 Okt 2019)

The Reformation
-------------------------------
Started with Martin Luther's declaration in 1517, when he posted his thesis in Wittenberg.
Some of those who broke from the Catholic church became the Lutherans, but there were also Calvinists at the time, followed by other branches.
Martin Luther's ideas:
	Protested against the church selling indulgences to spend them on property and new lifestyles.
		> He was excommunicated because of his protest.
	He was forced to admit his mistakes before the emperor, but he refused.
He was in Northern Germany where the the locals did not get along well with the Pope.
	The local rulers wanted to gain more power by breaking the church's ties with Rome and gaining the power of assigning offices and deciding who has power.
	Gustav Avsa used this to dissolve monasteries and use the recovered funds to pay their debts off.
		Protestantism became the state religion at the time, but did not take over Catholic faith overnight. New institutions had to be established.
		It became a majority religion with all relevant establishments in 1597 (confirm)
	Albert von Hohenzollern of the Teutonic Knights became the first ruler (Duke of Prussia) to become a Lutheran ruler and establish it as the state religion.
	Protestantism was like a German revolution at the time because it spread through the German and Hanseatic towns in the region rapidly.
		The Hanza spread the religion to the cities that they operated in around the Baltic. Some of those cities were among the first to adopt the religion.
		The cities in the Baltic were eager about Protestantism because that gave the cities independence from the Archbishop of Riga.
	The young scholars who studied with Martin Luther were eager to spread his ideas around the region. Their efforts were also aided by the printing press.
		The sudden change actually lead to a decline in knowledge because at the time a majority of the literate people were monks and they had access to a wide variety of books.
The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth was open to all religions, so both Catholic and reformed churches as well as Jews and Muslims were present in the region.
	In mid 16th century, Calvinism became common among the nobility of Lithuania. It became an expression of Lithuanian nobility distinguishing themselves from Polish nobility. It was informally used to define Lithuanian people.
Translation of the Bible:
	A core idea for the reformation was that the Bible should be translated to local languages, not interpreted from Latin by the church.
	-> Being able to read the word of god by oneself.
	The people in the region was impacted by the idea because even though literacy would not be very common for a long time, the clergymen were able to read the Bible in the local languages and issues while translating or interpreting were mostly eliminated. It also made it more appealing for the people affected.
		The people using the translated Bible thought that they were taking the religion as it is to the people for the first time.
		Before the reformation the church did not really prosper because their budget was very limited and the population was very sparse. Because the peasants were not guided, there were many pagan elements in their belief.
		When it was first brought, the Protestant faith was very intolerant of any pagan beliefs. Women were generally accused of witchcraft. (In Estonia, men were more commonly accused as witches, around 100 people were killed as witches).
	Short interpretations of the Bible were also released at the time, to guide the people in the right direction.
	Universities were founded in both Catholic and Protestant regions to train people who would spread the religion to more people.
		Facultues were rather limited. Theology, medicine, philosophy and law were most common.
Counter-reformation:
	In Poland-Lithuania, Stefan Batory was the first ruler to counter the Protestant reformation. He establish Catholic schools. His successor, Sigismund III also follow a similar policy
		-> Even though the state was tolerant, the rulers were Catholic and had policies against the reformed branches.
Tsar Aleksey (1645-1676) and reformation in Eastern Christianity (1653)
	Happened under Patriarch Nikon during Aleksey's reign
	Aimed to clean up the misguided, unauthentic parts of the Slavic liturgy.
		Going back to the religion that was introduced to the lands by Greek scholars.
		They believed that the faith had changed over the centuries, and the religion had to be cleaned up.
		Was also used as a way to centralize power and become the head of the hierarchy. Aleksey wanted to have more power over the church and have the centre of power under his rule.
	Led to schism in the Russian church.
		The Old Believers (Raskols) thought that the innovations by Nikon was blasphemy.
		These people declared heretics and were persecuted. They spread around the Russian Empire, where authorities could not persecute them.
			Many moved to Lithuania, which was tolerant to all religions and already had a large Orthodox population
			Some also moved across Siberia to Alaska.
The Dutch influence in the region
	Dutch development of the Fluyt: Cheaper to produce, carried larger loads, more suitable for the region.
		The Hanza were very strict about ship building, so they did not share their designs with Hanza. The Dutch had to design their own.
		Danzig, the wealthiest city in the region, was managed by the Hanza until the Dutch came along. They took over transport of grain to the West.
			The Renaissance Dutch architecture spread in regions where the Dutch traded.
		The Dutch relied on grain imports as the land was not suitable for grain farming. After ships sold their goods in the east, some of them brought grains back. Others went further east for other resources.
		The English also tried to compete with the Dutch in the region, but they were not successful as they focused more on Atlantic trade.
	They were successful and took over the Hanseatic trade not only because of their ships, but also because of their developments in accounting and credit system.
	The Dutch were invited to Gothenberg/Goeteborg to develop a city.
		They built a city using the Dutch colonial model, settled Dutch and Scottish people. The city was governed as it would in the Netherlands.
		It is located in the small strip of land where Sweden reaches the North Sea (Between Norway and Denmark).
		Chalmers Technical University, in Gothenberg, was the first technical university in the region
		It was a major trade centre, gave the Swedes access to the Atlantic without having to go through Oresund. This allowed the Swedes to expand in the Atlantic and started their migration.
Swedish Empire:
	Gustav II Adolf (Gustavus Adolphus) 1611-32
		Aka. The lion of the North
		The empire expanded in the Baltic under his rule:
			They take Ingria, cutting of Russia's access to the Baltic Sea.
			They also took Livonia. Riga at the time was wealthier than Stockholm and helped the empire's finances.
		His chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna was important for the empire. He led many developments and innovations in the empire.
		Sweden intervened in the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) in the Protestant side
			This changed the balance of the war in favor of the Protestants.
			His forces landed in Germany and reached Muenchen and turned back further into the war.
			Gustav II led the armies into battles himself. He died on the battlefield.
		
Oldest universities in the Baltic Sea Region:
	1364: Krakow - Poland
	1419: Rostock - Mecklenburg
	1456: Griefswald - Pomerania
		Griefswald and Rostock used to be the two prestigious schools that most people from the region attended, even after the two later universities were established.
	1477: Uppsala - Sweden
	1479: Copenhagen - Denmark
	1544: Koenigsberg - Prussia
		First university established as a stronghold of Protestant faith, to train the clergy.
	1579: Wilno - Lithuania
		Originally founded a decade earlier as a Jesuit college. Later expanded to a university in 1579. At the time, local merchants and rulers were Protestant.
	1632: Tartu - Estonia in Sweden
	1640: Turku - Finland in Sweden
Timeline of the Swedish Empire:
	1611: Karl succeeded by son Gustav II Adolf
	1612: Axel Oxenstierna becomes chancellor
	1617: Peace of Stolbova, Russia cedes Ingria
	1621: Goeteborg founded. Settled by Dutch
	1629: Treaty of Altmark, Sweden gains Livonia from Poland
	1630: Swedish army intervenes in Germany
	1632: Founding of University of Tartu
	1632-44: Oxenstierna regency
	1644: Queen Christina comes of age
	1648: End of the Thirty Years' War
	1654: Christina converts to Catholicism, abdicates
Baltic overseas colonies:
	Sweden:
		New Sweden, Delaware (US) 1638-55
			Taken from the Dutch, lost to the English.
			The settlers were mostly Finns.
		Gold Coast (Ghana) 1650-63
	Denmark:
		Fort Christianborg (Osu, Ghana) 1663-1850
		St. Thomas (US Virgin Islands) 1671-1917
		Tranquebar (SE India) 1620-1845
	Courland (by Jacob Kettler, Duke of Courland - 1642-82):
		Fort Jacob (Gambia) 1651-61
		Tobago 1642-89