HIS244 Lecture 9 (14 June 2017)

Da French Revolution
-------------------------------
Roots and Causes:
	Long term:
		Enlightenment and its ideas
		Idea that the society can + should be reformed
		Church much weaker than before. Rise of deism + scientific approach + use of reason.
		Legal system went through many reforms, but still gives priveleges to a minority based on social status.
		Economic system outdated
			Guilds
			Tariffs
			Mercantilism
		Middle class rising
		People were not happy with the taxation systems.
		Nobility weakening, but still depend on servitude.
		--> Pol/Soc/Eco system of France did not fit in the modern system, needed to change.
	Short term:
		System of class privelege (1.5% of population) annoys everyone
		Actue financial crisis
		Bad harvests + rise in food prices
		Incompetence of Louis XVI

	Why France?
		Absolutist state, but other absolutist states took steps towards raising public contribution/standards. France did not
		France more advanced than eastern european monarchies
		Home of the enlightenment, societies of thinkers 
		Intellectually very active
	Financial Crisis:
		Constant wars in 1600's + 1700's
		Massive state debt
			~50% of state budget went towards budget payments
			Most of these owned to international banks and foreign governments.
	Tax Reform
		Done by Louis XVI
		Aristocracy against the reforms, they control the parliament
			They don't want to pay taxes, believing that only the poor must pay taxes.
			Lower nobility also against the reforms, as they bought their office to avoid paying taxes.
		Church does not want to pay taxes.
		Merchants and traders fear that their businesses will be threatened
		Lower class didn't have any more money to pay
		
	Aristocracy and the Feudal Reaction:
		They are dissatisfied with their economic status and the monarchy
		Middle class rising, they had further economic resources and power.
		The system of priveleges does not let them participate in economic activities. Guilds do not let them participate.
		In severe debt, losing estates and priveleges
		Their solution:
			Tried to impose old priveleges, by asking for further tax payments
			New measures that removed their restrictions on the implementation of the agricultural reform
			Wanted to reform the parliament to counter the power of the king.
	Lower Nobility:
		Not happy about the overselling of ofices --> cuts into their revenue
		Restrictions on the positions in the army, they cannot buy these positions anymore
		Decline in the value of agricultural production, their estates decrease in value
	Upper middle class
		Mercantile regulations restrict their economic activities
		Lack of political representation
	Urban Poor and Lower Middle Classes
		Stagnation in income, prices are constantly going up, taxes are also on the rise
		Often unemployed, guilds not hiring many people, cheap English emports kill local production.
	Peasants
		Unhappy - as they always are
		Dissatisfied with the agricultural revolution
		Population is increasing, but land not increasing.
			Their lands have to be divided, they do not like this.
		Angry about church and aristocratic holdings
		Angry about taxes
	Church
		Unhappy about loss of priveleges, status		
	--> Nobody is happy
	
Periods:
	Constitutional period (1789-1792)
	Republican (radical) period (1792-1794)
	Thermidorian Reaction (1794-1799)
	Napoleonic Period (1799-1815)
	
Road to Revolution:
	Proposed tax reforms.
		Nobility agree to it, but want to call the estates general (duality of power between monarach and parliament)
	Nobles are called to Paris. They do not agree to registration of any new taxes until the financial records are examined.
		He refuses, he disbands the parliament right away.
	Among growing financial crisis, Parliament is reestablished. New taxes not accepted by nobility
		Louix XVI aims to use the resentment of estates against each other.
		Elections are called
			Both the noble estate and the church return with very liberal representatives
				--> They seek reforms.
			The Third estate is far more radical than the king expected
		All estates Immediately bring letters of grievance, all of them want reforms
			Conjunction of interests: Everyone wants a reform, cooperates with each other to some degree
		May 1, 1889: All three estates convene in paris, all ready to fight
		
	Procedural problems:
		There are only 3 votes, each estate gets 1 vote
		3rd estate wished to vote by delegate rather than per estate.
			Massive public campaign on this idea. People support this.
			Louis refuses their demands.
		3rd estate secedes from the estates general, calls on the other estates to form the new national assembly
		Tennis court oath: will not stop fighting unless a constitution is drawn. Demand a constitution
		King agrees to limited reforms, but only if voting by estate resumes
		June 30, 1789: Louis agrees to voting by delegate.
	This came too late, as the common people were mobilized by mid-june. Radical groups growing in influence in 3rd estate.
		The groups do not want minor concessions, but a full revolution.
	July 14, 1789: Storming of the Bastille. A major symbol of popular resistance to oppresion.
	Mobs of Paris form the National Guard, under Marquis de Lafayette.
	
The Reformist Period (1789-1792) - Constitutional Monarchy.
	National Assembly names itself Constitutional Assembly
		Aims:
			Remove old privelege system
			Create a political program
			Draw a constitution
	The Great Fear
		Peasants destroyed old records that the nobility had
		More than 1700 estates (belonging to the 1st and 2nd estate) looted and burned
		After this, the two estates wanted to cooperate more with the 3rd estate to pacify the peasants.
	Many noblemen publicly renounce their old priveleges. End of the Old Regime, End of the Estates General.
	The noblemen that did not renounce their privleges escaped the country. Mainly to Germany.
	August 26, 1789: Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen
		Privelege system to be removed
		Abuse of rights is the source of corruption
		The king should remain, but should not be sovereign.
		Position of women + inequality of wealth never mentioned.
	Under Marie Antoinette's influence, Louix XVI accepts the declaration, but mobilizes loyal troops.
		National Guard + Parisian women storm Versailles. King is put under house arrest.
	
	Constitution of 1791
		Constitutional monarchy
		King is servant of people, only in control of military and foreign policy
		King has right to veto over legislature for 2 years.
		Elections based on tax status (wealth-based voting)
		Church taken under control state.
			Church properties confiscated.
			Priests and bishops locally elected
			Political and economic powers removed
			Elimination of all privelege by birth
		
		Problems:
			Relies on:
				Cooperation of the king (which would never happen)
				Cooperation of the ruling class (most of which are running away)
				Cooperation of the people (who are becoming increasingly radical)
				Cooperation of the rest of Europe.
			Peasants still had no political rights. Did not like anti-clerical measures.
			Clergy unhappy as they lost their influence
			Aristocracy unhappy as they lost their privelege
			King did not want to be a part of any of these.
	June 1791 - Louis XVI flees Paris for Germany. Is caught and put in house arrest.
	Coalition is formed to bring stability to France (Austria, Prussia, German Federation, later by GBR, Spain, Russia, Naples, Sardinia...)
		This coalition invades France. Country becoming more radical
	Creation of citizen army. After a series of defeats, the citizen army was able to hold off invading armies.
	
The Radical Period (1792-1794)
	Causes:
		King is discredited, cannot be trusted
		Foreign invasion, people under constant fear
		Clergy in rebellion
		Counter-revolution and local uprisings. Risk of secession.
		Economic collapse.
		--> revolution seems to be on the brink of collapse.
	
	Jacobins:
		A small group of middle class people gained extensive influence over the mob of paris, arguing that the new constitution had no care for the lower class.
	The jacobins storm the king's house arrest location, put him in prison
	Division between the members of the group.
	Calls for the new national convention, to make a new constitution.
	Jacobins push for more radical reforms, demanding anyone against the revolution to be removed from power.
		As the judgements were not up to the jacobins' expectations, the mobs storm the prisons and kill all prisoners.
	September 21, 1792: Monarchy abolished, France declared a republic.
	
	Troubles:
		First Coalition formed in 1793 (NED, GBR, SPA, NAP, SAR, PRU, AUT)
		Rift between Paris and the countryside
		Shortages in Paris, people getting even more radical. Now hostile to anyone but the Jacobins.
		
	Committee of Public Safety, and the Reign of Terror:
		Dominated by the Jacobins
		Aims:
			To eliminate foreign threats
				Levée en Masse: all males of age are called to military service.
				An army of 1.5M fielded immediately.
				Untrained but highly effective. Did not follow the old military structures.
				Enemies not only pushed back, but Belgium is also invaded. Dutch republic became a subject of France.
				Idea behind their invasion: bringing freedom to the oppressed nations.
			To eliminate the threat of counter-revolution
				Special tribunals formed.
					All crimes are immediately dealt with.
				The countryside rebellions stopped brutally
				Over 100K victims
			To maintain order
			
	Building the new revolutionary society:
		Project in social engineering
		Messianic in character
		Terror as justifiable tool
			Those who join will benefit from this.
			Those who refuse can either leave, or they will be killed.
		
		Censorship of arts in public expression
		New dress code. People attacked on street for not following.
		Must address others differently
		New, non-christian calendar
		The metric system
		New festivals, common people activities to spread the revolutionary ideas.
		Cult of reason --> churches closed. Temples of reason established.
		
		Arrests and executions in the country:
			King (not approved by the rest of Europe)
			Non-cooperating members of the military
			Anyone suspected of being a threat to the revolution
			Some jacobins that were not found revolutionary enough.
			
	Why the committee was still in power:
		Constant threat of foreign invasions
		Distribution of noble + clergy posessions to the public
		Economic sucess
			Price controls
			Reduction of inflation
		Social Programs
			Free and compulsory public education
			
Thermidorian Reaction:
	End of Jacobin reign of teror:
		Internal and external stabilization, no more threats.
		Economy already improved
		Everyone under constant fear of death
	Jacobins disbanded, Sans Culottes broken down and dismantled.
	
	Problems.
		The revolution was successful. Problems already fixed
		Removal of checks of balanced.
		No more threats, government always had to get more radical.
	
	The Directory:
		King dead, all relatives either dead or missing. Nobody to rule the country.
		Return to the parliament system, wealth-based
		Indirect elections --> multi-stage elections
		
		Jacobins still not happy. Thier riots put down.
		Royalists also tried to take power.
		
The Napoleonic Period.