HIS244 Lecture 8 (12 June 2017)

Polan.
-------------------------------
Second biggest territory in Europe (after Russia)
Second largest population in Europe (after France)
Relatively stable and secure (no enemy troops since 1300's)
Not formed by conquest, but a union between Poland and Lithuania
	Later joined (voluntarily) by Prussia (1400's)
	Also joined by Livonia + Moldova
	
Political System:
	Constitutional elected monarchy.
		Parliament has right to commission taxes, control taxes, can supervise the king
		No law can be passed without the approval of the parliament
		King is elected from noble families
	Armed rebellion obligatory against kings who breaks the laws.
	Parliament divided into 3:
		King
		Senate
			Chosen by the king
		Representatives
			Chosen by the nobles
			
		"Liberum Veto": right to break the parliament --> if legislation infringes on regional interests.
		King > Central Administration > Regional Administration
		Larger towns and cities are autonomous. Small towns have no autonomy.
		TAxation low.
	Legal System
		General Tribunal > Provincial Courts > Regional Courts
		King not a part of this system.
	
Religion:
	Catholic: 40%
	Protestant: 20%
	Lutheran: 12%
	...
	Warsaw Confederation(1573): "Act of mutual support and tolerance"
		Unrestricted worship, religious tolerance.
	Jewish autonomy (~75% of all jews here)
	
Society:
	Polish: 40%
	Ruthenians: 22% (ukrainians + bielorussians)
	Lithuanian: 11%
	German: 10%
	....
	Official lingo:
		Adm., Law: Latin
		Regional: Ruthenian, German, Polish
	Theoretically no restrictions. Any religion can hold any position.
	Intermarriage, cultural mixing common
	
Nobility:
	~10% of entire population
	Nobility is the presence of political power rather than wealth.
	No division between nobility: no special titles in the country.
	Taxes are paid by the nobility, not the peasantry
		The tax rate is still low.
	Weird code of behaviour: They adhere to a knightly code of behaviour, dress in traditional clothing.
	
Economy:
	Largest urban centre: Danzig
	No famines or malnourishment; yields are high, peasants hold relatively more land
	Peasants must work on noble estate for 3 days a week
	International trade, mainly for agricultural export
	
Foreign Policy:
	Relatively peaceful. Usually don't declare war
		War --> more taxes. Nobles don't want this.
	Little land is lost in wars, but are commonly regained shortly
	Almost no expansion.
	
Military:
	Very small, but highly professional
	Largely cavalry-based
	Cavalry locally trained, units in military are absent in other armies
	Infantry mainly mercenaries
	Successful even when outnumbered 1 to 4
	
Decline:
	Political:
		Counter-reformation - started imposing regulations against non-catholics
			Alienated members of other religions
			Removed rights of office of some religions
		Cultural unification and Ethnic conflict
			Upper class increasingly polish. Other groups losing their representation.
		--> attempts on religious unity in multi-religious environment very devastating
		--> cultural unification on a multi-cultural environment also devastating
	Economic:
		Economy was dependent on foreign trade.
			When prices went down due to agricultural reforms, they had to lower costs. This was not good for their economy
		Trade surplus declined in domestic market
		Large scale export and pauperization of middle class.
		Decline in status of peasantry and their pauperization.
		--> pushing the low-class to the level of subsistence is not beneficial
	
	Parliamentary system:
		Paralyzed by liberum veto
		Lack of participation due to changing in status of classes
		
	International System:
		Centralization in neighbours made them stronger
		Larger professional armies could easily defeat polish military
		Neighbours also wanted territorial expansion.
		Underfinanced army
			Army was not expanded due to its success.
			Unable to modernize or transform into a large standing force
		
		--> Strength of a country invites combined attacks at first suitable opportunity
			Massive coalitions against poland
	
	Monarchy weak, unable to respond to these challenges
	Complacency
		Long periods of success made them unable to evolve, adapt to new challenges
		Sense of superiority
		--> stagnation

-------------------------------
Yurop on te eve of the french revolution
-------------------------------
Balance of power:
	Idea started by the Peace of Westfallen.
	Mainly to resist the French expansion
	States formed temporary alliances to not let other countries get too strong.
	
Wars:
	War of Spanish Succession:
		France was opposed by a large coalition
	War of Polish Succession
	War of Austrian Succession:
		Anti-Prussian(+French and Spanish) coalition
		--> Prussia rose as one of the major powers of Europe
	Seven Years War
		Started by Austria to regain Silesia
		France + Russia + Austria in an alliance
		Prussia able to defeats Austrians and French, but loses Berlin to Russia
		Treaty of Paris: Prussia retains Silesia, France loses large parts of colonial possessions
		All parties financially exhausted
		
Armies, Navies and Warfare
	Improvements in artillery
	New muskets
	Large line infantry formation --> "theatre of operation"
	Battle of manuever. Requires extensive training. Soldiers under very strict control, but desertions very common. (up to 35% of army)
	Considerable improvements to ships
		Ships of the line: large, expensive, heavily armed ships.
		England had superiority over other European forces.
		

Austria:
	Maria Theresa in power.
	Reliance on German-speaking nobility
		Hungarian-speaking nobility became more common later.
	Not very strong economically.
	Absolutist centralization, but nobles still retain most of their rights
	
Prussia:
	Highly centralized state with efficiant bureaucracy, administration
	Small population, very large standing army
	Expansionist tendencies
	
Russia:
	Adjusting to the new european culture.
	Under Catherine, process of reformation continues
	Expansion of foreign trade.
	Nobility under full control.
	Wars + expansion into ottoman empire.
	Liquidation of crimean khanate.
	
Partition of Poland:
	Russia took parts of Poland, but also offered territories to Prussia + Austria to maintain balance of power
	Reform movement in Poland + Third of May Constitution
	Russian intervention + Second partition of Poland
	--> all three eastern empires expanded, got stronger
	
England:
	Catholics no longer allowed to gain power
	England + Scotland + Wales under union
		Stewarts no longer allowed to gain the throne of Scotland.
		Union Jack
	After Anne, Hanoverian Dynasty
		George I, II, III
		Foreign monarch with little involvement in the rule.
	Duality of power between the monarchy and the parliament
		House of commons larger, but chosen by a narrow group of people
		Highly inefficient. Politial patronage, rotten boroughs, pocket boroughs.
	Foreign kings largely disinterested with English politics
		--> parliament got expanded powers
		Emergence of political parties (Tories, whigs)
			--> permanent group protecting certain interests
	
	Economic growth through colonial expansion + trade improvements
	Control over speculation and stock exchange.
	London became the financial capital of Europe.
	Emergence of modern English identity:
		Protestant
		Connected to certain civil freedoms
		Imperial + superior, entitled
		Materialistic, pursuit of profit
		Socially harmonious
	
American War of Independence:
	Rising taxes + tariffs in colonies after numerous wars
	Demanded representation, was disproportionate
	Lockean rights, ideas
	Massive foreign assistance to Americans
		Caused the 4th Anglo-Dutch war.
		A lot of volunteers from Europe
	Treaty of Versailles (1783) --> US independent, humiliation of great britain
	GBR, FRA, NED bankrupt, serious financial crisis.
	Quebec Act --> catholicism recognized
	Indian Act
	
Demands of Reforms:
	Demand for greater freedom of press
	The french culture of information exchange, gatherings spreads in Engand.
	Parliaments increasingly seen as a check on absolutism. 
		They were later temporarily suspended.
	Many uprisings in empires. Most of them put down.
		End of absolutist rule in Denmark
		
-------------------------------
European Culture of the Late Early Modern Perod
-------------------------------
		