HIS244 Lecture 10 (19 June 2017)

Napoleon (cont.) + Congress of Vienna + European Culture
-------------------------------
Organization of Empire:
	France was expanding its borders, towards Spain, Italy + The Netherlands.
		These lands were controlled mainly to expand the continental system.
	Prussia, Spain, Naples, Denmark, Austria under partial French control.
	Continental System:
		Fixed exchange system. No tariffs
			To promote french economic development by removing barriers for flow of french merchandise
			In general, to help develop these regions.
			(secret) Proved to economically weaken Britain. Trade with them prohibited.
				British exports declined by 20%. Wheat imports dropped by 50%, shortages of food in Britain.
				Made Britain turn its interest on other parts of the world.
	Because Napoleon had no children, he divorced Josephine.
		He marries Marie Louise from House of Habsburg.
			Additional element for a formal alliance with Austria
			Napoleon II is born.
Problems for the Empire:
	Britain:
		Does not accept any form of settlement or coexistence with France.
		Imposes a full blockade on continental Europe.
			Attacking American vessels going to France, capturing American military vessels and using them in British navy
				Leads to war of 1812
	Spain:
		Continental Campaign:
			Britain lands on Portugal for defense.
			In the meantime, they depose the local dynasty. Rebellion in Spain, also against the French.
			Joseph is sent from Netherlands to Spain.
				Brings reforms to Spain to "modernize" them.
				Not popular in Spain.
				Conservatives rebel against the French.
			Almost 400,000 civilians died in the rebellion against the French.
	Papal States:
		Because French occupied Rome, Napoleon is excommunicated.
		Pope under house arrest.
	Prussia and Austria:
		New reforms.
			Abolishment of serfdom
			Property of rights for peasants
			Educational reforms
			Legal reforms
			Reforms of the military
			Civilian militia
		--> These reforms help the states grow, become stronger.
		These reforms are taken from French examples.
	Russia:
		Not happy on the continental system, they depended on food exports to Britain
		Russians furious about the existence of Duchy of Warsaw
		Russia's expansion into Sweden and Ottomans worried Napoleon
		Napoleon thought this only independent European state had to be brought in line.
War of 1812
	Napoleon decides to invade Russia
	1811/12: building of the Grande Armée and system of alliances
	June 22-24 1812: Invasion of Russia begins.
		The same day that Hitler invaded Russia.
	Aimed to counterbalance Russian strength by recreating the Polish-Lithuanian state --> "The Second Polish War"
	
	Grande Armée:
		280K French
		100K Poles
		160K Germans total
		50K Italians total
		15K Austrians
		--> Like a crusade
	Russians aware that they could not oppose this army in conventional warfare, on the battlefield
	Tactic of witdrawal:
		Withdrawing further into Russia, tiring and weakening them slowly.
		French aims: defeating Russians once or twice, reaching Smolensk ("Gateway to Russia"), imposing a peace treaty.
		Battle of Smolensk:
			Russians were waiting for French.
			French successful, Napoleon expects peace
			Waits for weeks, no Russian response.
			Starts marching towards Moscow.
		Growing concern among Russian nobility, that Russians were not giving a fight against French.
			Came to a point that there was almost a coup in Russia.
		Kutuzov ordered to stand his ground. Results in Battle of Borodino
		Battle of Borodino:
			Russians and French were almost evenly matched.
			Bloodiest day of battles in this period.
			French forces defeat Russian forces, they are pushed back.
			Russian forces not broken, still in retreat.
		Napoleon arrives in Moscow, but the entire population of the city + military abandoned the city.
		Moscow was burned down including all supplies, making it impossible for Napoleon to stay further through winter.
		Napoleon aims to go through Ukraine
		Battle of Maloyaroslavets: Road south is blocked
		Napoleon forced to return through the same route. Scorched earth policy made them impossible to forage.
		Russian Winter + Lack of winter clothes + Low supplies + army too big to maintain.
		Battle of Berezina: French army no longer has any cohesion, but not fully defeated.
		French forces constantly under attack by Byelorussian peasantry.
		Cossacks also attack French forces.
		~400K French dead, ~220K Russian forces + ~40K Russian civilians dead.
Road to defeat:
	1813: Russian-Prussian alliance, birth of 4th coalition.
		GBR joins the coalition
		After failing to reach a common ground with Napoleon, Austria joins the calition
	Rebellions in Italy, Germany, Netherlands. Opposition quickly growing
	Wars of Liberation, 1813-14
	Allies demand return to all "natural" frontiers
		Napoleon does not respond as he wins all individual battles
		Hopes to defeat the coalition
		But the enemy force is too big.
	Mid March 1814: Legislative body + senate denounce the emperor
	Late March 1814: Allied forces enter Paris. Napoleon flees.
	Napoleon abdicates, but allies refuse to let his son + wife remain in power.
	Napoleon is exiled.
	Bourbons returned
One Hundred Days:
	February 26, 1815: Napoleon lands in France with 700 men
		The troops that are sent to stop him switch sides, join Napoleon.
	Napoleon Arrives in Paris, emperor runs away.
	Napoleon announces that he does not war, accepts allied terms.
	Allies do not agree. Allied mobilization of 1M troops.
		Napoleon hopes to defeat the allied armies individually and gain victory + time.
		Prussian army defeated, they pursue the fleeing army.
	June 18, 1815: Battle of waterloo
		Prussian forces arrive from flight, they flank the French.
		Dutch + British + Prussian forces defeat French forces.
		French army disintegrates
	Napoleon abdicates again in favour of his son, this is not accepted.
	Tries to escape to USA, but it is prevented by the blockade.
	Napoleon is sent to St. Helena. Dies in 1821.
	
Congress of Vienna (November 1814 - June 1815)
	Many representatives from many countries (even the French)
		These representatives are monarchists who want to return to the old system
		They want to restore balance pf power, still afraid of French power.
	Legitimacy and Restoration
	Concert of Europe, the Holy Alliance.
	Countries almost go to war with each other, but appearance of Napoleon unites them again.
	
	Territorial settlements:
		Russia:
			Poland + Finland + Bessarbaria.
		Prussia:
			Posen, 40% of Saxony, Rhineland/Westphalia.
			Prussia acquires the lands that they were competeing for against Austria
			Die Wacht am Rhein: Natural borders of Germany
		Austria:
			Parts of Italy
		German Confederation:
			Not 300 states anymore
		Britain:
			???
	Conclusions:
		Discussion is required before conflict between 2 parties
		Any solution to political or territorial dispute must include the inerests of those not directly involved in it
		Long term interests more important than immediate gains
		About 100 years of peace in Europe.
Conclusions of the French Revolution:
	France:
		Does not return to exactly what it was before.
		Equality of people + status of church stay in place.
		Priveleges not fully restored, some are returned though.
		France is now "Bourgeoisie Monarchy"
	Elsewhere:
		All nations now exposed to the elements of the revolution. The influences could not be removed.
		Nationalism in effect after this period.
		Territorial arrangements opened the way for the unification of German and French nations + emergence of Belgium, independence of Norway.
	Individualism:
		This idea dated back to Renaissance, it is now very common again.
		Practice of political representation, old system not fully returned.
		
		
		
European Culture:
	Art/architecture
		Baroque Period (~1580 - ~1720)
			Glory of the catholic church
				Showing the greatness of the catholic belief
			Exaggerated, grandoise
			Also used to express the authority of the state
		Rococo (~1720 - ~1770)
			A reflection of the aristocratic pleasure lifestyle
			Took too much time to implement. Too much decoration. "Wow factor"
			It was not followed by the middle class, but only the upper class.
		Neo-Classicism (17th century onward)
			Very different from the other two.
			Very plain, simple, organized
			Use of lines, simple shapes.
			Paris became the cultural capital of Europe.
	Painting:
		Just like art, gets increasingly devoted to everyday life.
		Art was no longer only for the aristocracy
		Became available for anyone who could afford it.
	Literature and Drama:
		....
	Music:
		Development of ballet, opera, operette.
		Mass creation of concert halls, theaters.
		Becoming more common, available to almost everyone now.
		