HIS244 Lecture 7 (7 June 2017)

Enlightenment, continued
-------------------------------
Classical Liberalism:
	Formulated in late enlightenment.
	Ideas of John Locke:
		People are inherently good.
		They do not need a state controlled church, censorship, etc. to formulate ideas as they can formulate their own ideas.
		Society without restriction will progress towards a modern, effective society.
		Economies should be deregulated.
		Free trade, personal freedoms (behaviour, choice, speech), equality
	Adam Smith
		"Invisible hand of the market" --> Being adjusted to the market demands and trends will benefit the society in the long run.
		"Any intervention to economy is harmful"
		--> Development of Lassez Faire economy
	Thomas Malthus
		Resources will be more constrained as demand increases.
		There must be a force controlling people's use.
	David Ricardo
		Iron Law of Wages --> Intervention to the wages of different people will yield disastrous results.
Utilitarian Liberalism:
	Jeremy Bentham --> Father of Utilitarianism.
		Reason and observations should be used to establish laws that benefit the society as a whole.
		--> government intervention is necessary. Not for the economy, but for the well-being of all people.
		"Don't touch anything in economy or society unless it is necessary."
Mary Wollstonecraft (1759-97)
	Response to the enlightenment environment.
	Questions: Why are the benefits of enlightenment limited to males?
	Notes that 40% of women can read, but cannot participate as men can do.
	Condemns the servile ignorance that they are issued.
		Argues that both sides contribute to this inequality.
**Enlightenment is....
	Assault on:
		traditional society
		position of religion and churches, on their hold of society
		social structure, where priveleges dictate all terms
		legal system in the society
		position on role of government

-------------------------------
Europe in the global context - Colonization
-------------------------------
Early Exploration and Colonization
	Before 18th century: mostly economic.
	In this era: economic and prestige aims.
	Aims to reach India --> A very major trade hub
	Countries claimed land to plunder and capture sources of gold+silver.
	Also to establish ports where ships could resupply.
	Destruction of empires in colonized regions, mainly with the aim of securing silver+gold.
	American silver --> once silver was discovered, more expeditions were sent to find silver.
17th + 18th century exploration + colonization:
	Search for the northwest passage
		Major trade routes were blocked by Spain and China. Other nations sought ways to reach india + china.
		Most of North America was discovered in this process.
		Mostly French + Dutch explorers
		String of French forts and settlements from Quebec to Gulf of Mexico.
	Search for new continents --> exploration of Pacific
	Geographical balance, Terra Australis
		"If there is a lot of land on north, there must be more land on south to balance that"
		Discovery of Australia (1606)
		New Zealand, Australia, Tasmania mapped.
			Inland maps would remain unmapped until the end of 19th century.
		James Cook:
			First Voyage:
				Samoa, Tahiti, Coast of Australia (Making maps of new territories, claiming land for Britain)
			Second Voyage:
				No Terra Australis, antarctic waters
			Third Voyage
				Mapped west coast of North America. (Britain claims Oregon + above areas)
				Hawaii
		Russians:
			Expanding east.
			Discovery of Bering Straits
			Colonization of Alaska.
			First visitors to Vancouver area. 
	Growing interest in foreign lands and cultures
		More people sponsor expeditions.
Types of Colonies:
	Trade outposts + Naval Bases
		Small fortified towns. Surrounded by native populace, trade with them.
	Corporate Colonies
		VOC, EEIC, Virginia Company
	Private Colonies
	State protected business colonies
		Caribbean colonies
		Have plantations, mainly produce sugar
		Run by local plantation owners
	Settlement colonies
		Mainly North American colonies.
		Outlaws are often sent to these colonies.
	Church colonies
		Almost independent jesuit-run towns.
		Many examples in South America
	Old Colonial Empires
		Oy vey.
Trade And Colonization:
	VOC - Dutch East India Company:
		A joint-stock company. Attracted investments from the people and the state
		Could colonize, make treaties, claim lands without gov't interference
		Mainly involved in spice trade.
		Colonies in Indonesia area.
		Dominated spice trade in the region, maintained spice trade monopoly until 18th century.
		Had very few european settlers in the trade posts. Mainy employed locals.
		Unlike the portugese, who did not disrupt local trade, VOC destroyed local trade activities due to their efficiency.
		Were taken over by the Dutch state.
	English East India Company:
		Like VOC, it was a joint-stock company
		Had its own navy, army, diplomatic priveleges
		Also aimed to reach india and control trade.
		Engaged in a private war with India. Made deals with Indian leadership, gained political, production and trade monopoly in India.
		Also focused on Chinese trade.
			Europe wanted chinese goods but china didn't want european products
			Opium was used by EEIC to trade with China.
	The Caribbean - "Sugar Islands"
		There are many small bases of European pirates and smugglers.
		Other european nations started to cut into Spanish and Portugese colonial posessions.
		Mainly occupied by european settlers, "Indentured Servants", who served as slaves in exchange for free passage to Americas.
		Plantations required extensive labour sources. Europeans didn't want to work as slaves
			Growth of slavery in Africa, brought to Americas.
			1789 French Caribbean: 56,000 Whites , 700,000 Africans.
		"Roman Law" followed by catholic countries gave slaves some rights.
			As a result, some slaves became free. Established own settlements + plantations.
	North America:
		England:
			Mainly driven by private contracts, to companies.
			Sent all poor, criminal, dissidents to America.
			Many people also went there willingly, encouraged by the British Government.
			Also joined by some germans.
		France
			Little state support.
			Did not want to depopulate France to populte Canada.
			Policy of Assimilation, intermarriage
			After wars with England, lost their territories to England.
			St. Pierre + Miquelon --> Was not included in treaty of Paris, remained French
		The Netherlands
			South America.
			New Amsterdam -> New York
		Sweden
			Failed.
Outcome:
	Economic:
		Economic market become more unified
			Same commodities now demanded across the globe
			Extensive trade of most commodities
		Cloth was shipped from east to west
		Gum (used in paper production) was shipped from west to east
		Atlantic Trade Triangle
			An oversimplification of the actual trade.
		European Trade:
			Imports + Exports covered large amounts of the countries' GDP.
	Political:
		New rivalries between counries.
		Very effective in GBR becoming the leading colonial empire in the world.
	Cultural:
		Constant exchange between cultures --> development/change of cultures.
		Development of new cultural identities, mainly in cultures
		Cross-cultural developments due to exchanges.
	Social Interaction:
		People from many cultures were brought into one environment.
			Intermixing not seen as a good thing in that era.
		New social structure based on appearance rather than social and economic position and culture.
			In 1662, Virginia laws were divided between christian and negroe
			In 1691, it became mostly defined by race.
		"Purity of Blood" became an important matter, a nationalist and racist division between people.
	Racism in colonies:
		In many spanish, portugese and french colonies, intermarriage continued despite regulations.
		Britain prohibited intermarriage from the start.
	Racism in Europe:
		Increasing stratifications of people, various labels attached to people.
		Friedrich Blumenbach
			Created a classification of races, creating lines of racial classification.
		Voices against slavery
			Abolished in Europe in 18th century
			Did not extend to colonies at that time.
	Theories of Global Development:
		Kenneth Pomeranz --> colnial possessions are not simply a consequence of European power, but also a source of that power
			--> allowing industrialization and creating growing economic disparity
			"The Great Divergence"
			