HIS244 Lecture 5 (31 May 2017)

Topics of Lecture 4, continued
-------------------------------
Diet and consumption:
	~75% of income on fuel, ~10% on shelter, ~5% on fuel. Very little expenditure on clothing.
	Diet based on bread (~60% of income). An average of 1-1.5kg a day.
	Some dairy + small amounts of fats and meat. Some fruits and vegetable.
	Raw fruit considered dangerous by people.
	Considerable beer and wine consumption. (1.7 - 2.5L per day)	
	Nobility had a lavish diet. Consumed lots of meat + delicacies brought from overseas.

Dangers of everyday existence:
	Taxation: ~35-50% of income. Different types of taxes for everyone.
	Status of the people: most of them weren't treated well.
	Weather disturbances lead to crop failures, so the subsistence economy is ruined, famines are not uncommon.
	Fires are common, hard to fight
	Bandits common. Marching armies pillage on their way
	Diseases (smallpox, typhus, ...), common. Black death still present. Various skin diseases, deformity, blindness, cataracts very common. 5% - 8% of people are unable to work due to diseases / disabilities.
	Lack of sanitation.
	Water unsafe.
	Life expectancy very short, 30-35 years. Half that for poor people.
	--> leads to very pessimistic life. Religion becomes a source of hope for people.
	Low quality of medical services. Apothecaries more respected + common than physicians. Their solutions not very effective. Home remedies often used.
	Professional midwives help with childbirth.
	Infanticide punishable by death, but still very common. Prostitution still common, but regulated/banned. Prostitutes were the majority of female settlers of the new world.
	Homosexuality legally condemned, but not commonly persecuted. Some waves of persecution present. Some people / monarchs openly homosexual.
	Societies dependent on soil for production.
	Return on agricultural investment low.
	For many european countries, agriculture was a majority of GDP.
	
Population growth:
	Population growth increased rapidly, from 0.3% to 1.1%
	Increased urbanization: Cities in newer powers had their capitals double or triple in size over the 200 years.
	Reasons:
		Reduced effect of most devastating cities
			Incresed regulations in city cleanliness effective
			Garbage collection, cleaning also helped
		Inoculations: death rate reduced from 14% to 1%.
		Lowering of marrying age, especially in the east.
		Wars were less disastrous to civilian population.
		More food available. Introduction of maize + potatoes. Food redistributed by the state.
	European population is redistributed to the west (population boom there).
	Greater strain on agriculture.
	Life standards rising. PPP rose from ~$5.5K to ~$7.5k
	
Economic Growth:
	Agriculture:
		By mid 1700's, yield began to grow. Food prices started to lower.
		More food surplus: England had to import grain, now started to export food.
		Proportion of income spent on food decreased from 75% to 50%. More funds spent on clothes, luxuries.
	Agricultural revolution:
		Developed in Netherlands, 1600's, 1700's. Adopted by England quickly.
		Proximity to large urban centres --> focused around urban market.
		Characteristics:
			Commercialization of agriculture
			Capital intensive farming
			Introduction of industrial crops
		Means:
			Drainage, landscaping
			Soil revitalization --> using nitrogen-fixing plants
			Crop rotation (abandoning three-field system) --> instead of letting one field rest, grow nitrogen-fixing plants.
			Convertible husbandry, fodder crops, selectie breeding
			Improved agricultural tools.
			Introduction of new plants
				Maize/corn, turnip --> animal fodder
				Rice, tomato
				Potato --> supplementary emergency crop
			Little Ice Age helped people adapt to these methods adapt.
			
			Rather than open field system + common lands, fields divided to plots, enclosures.
			Land became profitable, bourgeoisie bought large plots of land to profit.
			
		Outcome:
			Increase in agricultual output:
			Rapid growth of population
			Accumulation of wealth to invest
			Poor farmers lost control of their lands when they were acquired by gentry. They went to cities for jobs. If not found, they went overseas. Poverty rising.
			Decline in position of women --> traditional farming households destroyed. Cottage industries declined.
		
	Economic centre shifted from Mediterranean to Atlantic Europe.
		Accumulation of capital in England, Netherlands, France.
	Development in transport techniques:
		Dutch fluyt, British tea clipper.
		New canals, river regulations for fast navigation.
		
	New Financial System:
		Single currency --> silver and gold standard.
		Establishments of large banks, national banks.
			People put money in banks. Banks invested those funds to make more money, return interest.
		Dropping interest rates.
		Accumulation of capital was the direct cause of industrial revolution
		
	Industrial revolution:
		Duh.
		Massive increase in productivity
		Society and economics changed completely.
		Transformation of balance between european states, as well as europe and the rest of the world.
		
		First stage: textiles --> the things mmediately needed by people (1760's)
		Second stage: coal metal (1800's)
		
		Causes:
			Guild system now more regulated, declines over time.
			Merchant entrepreneurs --> accumulation of capital.
			Deforestation and lack of natural sources of renewable energy.
				Charcoal production was a major limiting factor.
				Increasing dependancy on coal, england 80% of coal production
			Close to surface resources depleted, deep shaft mines needed.
			Use of coke instead of charcoal reduced iron prices.
			Atmospheric engine --> used for drainage of mines.
			Steam engine improved mine drainage.
			Wage system --> made it simpler for people to get paid, convert income to product.
		
		Growth of textile industry very important in the growing demand for better machinery. Increasing demand for cotton raise production in US, epxnasion of slavery in the US.
		Increased consumerism
			More goods imported from overseas provinces + colonies
			Luxuries more affordable
			New bourgeoisie live under the same standards as the nobility, but still not exempt from tax.
				This angers them.
		
Changing urban environment:
	Urban population rises. Working people increase.
	Town planning and reconstruction everywhere.
		Improving the traffic management
		Improvements in basic sanitation methods
		Street lightning.
	Gentry + clergy move to cities too. 
	Greter interaction and merging between classes and social groups.
	Gentry and people of middle rank start getting more involved in production.
	Education levels rise. Gentry more interested in legal + economical education.
	Crime rates rise. Violence common. Police forces grow, law is enforced very harshly. Capital punishments increase and become more common. Punishments more common among the poor.
	Beginning of segregation inside cities between classes; visible differences in poor and wealthy neighbourhoods
	Consumerism expanding.
	Increasing unrest among non-nobility since they now have similar life status with them, interact with them very often, but still don't have the same rights as them.
	
-------------------------------
Scientific Revolution:
	Changes in the thought process, methods of reasoning.
	Prior to this era, the methods of thinking depended on aristotlean scholasticism.
		Memorized the thoughts and approaches of past great figures
		Trying to improve existing ideas, re-proving them.
		Moving from general theory to a particular focus.
		Contradicting authorities in the thinking process is not allowed
		The universe is perfectly ordained (The thought is a fusion of greek philosophy and christian theology)
			Everything happens to a specific rule --> reflection of god's perfection.
			All elements in their correct place
			Perfection of planets' shapes.
			A geo-centric approach.
	Beginnings of challenges to this started from astronomers.
		The church was not happy about the people's challenging of their beliefs.
		Nicolaus Coppernicus: theory of a heliocentric universe. Past proposed perfections no longer valid
		Tycho Brahe: Movement of planets not perfect. Discovery of supernova
		Johannes Kepler: Elliptical orbits. Motion of planets not uniform; three laws of Planetary motion
		Neo-pythagorean thought: God's creation can be explained and analyzed by mathematical analysis.
		Galileo Galilei:
			Circles around saturn
			Satellites of various planets
			Proposal of intertia: nothing returns/converges to a natural state. --> rejection of the natural perfect systems
			Human perception is not perfect; idea of perfection comes from our own inadequateness.
		Use of Scientific Method:
			Observe and accumulate data
			Look for mathematical ordering / put data in order
			Verify the data mathematically
			Establish a new theory or new law
			The validity of the theory or law can be challenged if further proof is given.
		Francis Bacon:
			According to bacon:
				European philosophy is mixed too much with theology
				European philosphy lacks practicality.
			Inductive reasoning:
				Observe first --> induction based on collection of data --> experimentation t oconfirm induction --> final theory
				Moving from particular to general. Small things add up to establish a general system.
		René Descartes:
			"Discourse on Method" --> *tutorial reading*.
			Every step on the way to prove something can be expressed in precise mathematical terms.
			Accurate measurements taken in experimentation must be reported; every step must be retraceable from others.
			Only through questioning, or questioning of questions, it is possible to come to conclusions.
			World was created by god, and then set in motion and left by the god. Like a great clock made by a great clockmaker and set in motion. "It should and has to be studied."
		Thomas Hobbes:
			Rejects the material and spiritual dualism of descartes.
			Senses are material, therefore it can be studied.
		Isaac Newton
			Systematizes the previous thoughts of philosophers and restructures it to a new packaged method.
			Gravity + laws of mechanics/motion, written as a challenge to previous thoughts.
			The whole universe runs according natural laws, not according to a divine presence.
			Humans can discover nature's laws + discover nature's remedies. Cure diseases, increase food supply, divert water bodies, build greater buildings, one day fly.
			If humans understand all of that, they will no longer be subjects of god.
			Believes that god still intervenes from time to time.
			His theories inspired many thinkers.
	Methods of reasoning:
		Cartesian:
			Form hypothesis, question to find flaws and in it, then refute those questions with logic. If this can be done, it is valid.
		Newtonian:
			Gather evidence, form hypothesis based on these, prove hypothesis with the evidence. If this can be done, it is valid.
		We now often a mix of these methods.
	Formation of scientific societies
		Groups of scientists exchanging knowledge, collaborating
	Women in science in this era, but for a short time.
	
	Outcome:
		Challenged the existing ways of thinking.
		Undermined anything that could not be proven or tested. Rationalism of thought and action.
		Everything is subject to scientific rules.
		Reason is humanity's greatest tool of progress. --> religion is dead.
	Organized religion and deism (like agnosticism)
		Belief in god, but not in the judeo-christian tradition.
		God is the creator and nature is the proof is that.
		True religion must agree with natural reason and evidence.
		Freedom of thought and tolerance.
		Thought alone leads to god.