HIS244 Lecture 3 (24 May 2017)

Transformation of European Politics: Absolutism and Enlightened Absolutism.
-------------------------------

Prior to absolutism:
	Obstacles:
		By 1500's, many kingdoms and principalities were unified, but there were still many autonomous and independent communities.
		Unity is formed due to loyalty to the local nobility, in a hierarchy.
		Monarch rules by negotiation:
			Some direct control/leadership
			Presence of external threat: used to maintain unity.
	Supporting Factors:
		Europe focused on changing + improving every aspect of life and government.
		Medieval state structure is highly inefficient.
		Emphasis on education.
		Change in the sense of rulership.
			Machiavelli's Prince is an example of that view.
		More wars in this era, more destructive.
	Start of Absolutism:
		Nobility is less effective in production, hold less economic power.
		Religious wars very common, harm all parties.
		New perception of royal power
			Based on antiquity, different identities of monarchs.
		Courts + bureaucrats become more involved in state management.
			Highest courts hold equal power to the monarch.
			Disputes taken to courts more often than before.
			King becomes the main source of law.
		Armies grow larger, become more professional.
			More expensive to maintain
		Merchants become more powerful, comparable to nobility
		Rise of protestantism
			Supports the crown; no longer as powerful as the monarch.
	Reformation and Counter Reformation:
		Earlier, church and the state ruled the nation together --> duality of power.
		By this time, competition between the church and state had decreased, in favour of the state.
		In protestant countries, almost all power was taken away from the church.
		Church lost its economic power. Subject to taxation for the first time.
			Previously, the church would take of those in need.
			Now it is up to the state to take this position.
		Catholic church willing to support the monarch in order to counter the growing threat of protestantism.
	War and Taxes:
		Need to tax every possible source of income:
			States need to maintain a larger military than their neighbours
			Wars are no longer to pillage, countries take more territory to gain further sources of income --> aims of war change.
		Military numbers of Eastern Europe rise while it decreases in Western Europe.
			Russia, Prussia, Habsburg Empire are in rapid growth.
	Sources of support to state:
		The Church
		Lower Nobility
			Want more power
			More Concessions
		"Middling Orders"
		Army + Bureaucracy
		The Court
	Sources of opposition to state:
		Higher Nobility
			Losing their authority + economic power in the country
		Peasantry
			Taxation
			Their rebellions were put down quickly
			Still had no political awareness.
		Religious and Cultural Minorities
			duh.
			(Against a strong central government which follows opposing ideas/religion)
		
The New System:
	Position of the absolute ruler:
		Monarchy has to maintain a large military and control over economic resources in order to maintain their power, deter outside challenges.
		Rulers maintain high standards, high prestige.
		They need money to support all their expenses + to bribe nobility/merchants to keep them loyal
		Need to maintain order within the country, provide security to the people.
		Must serve different strata of the community:
			Nobility:
				Their priveleges must be preserved
			Urban Merchants + traders
				Local development has to be subsidized
			Peasantry:
				Mostly ignored, as long as the image of a powerful monarch is maintained
			Aristocracy:
				A lost cause. mostly independent
				Better to leave alone.
				
			
		"Representative Monarchy"
			Monarchs needed to patron artists and thinkers to maintain their power + prestige.	
	Characteristics of the New State:
		Strong, professional, central bureaucracy centred around the monarch
		Absence of representative forms of government: direct control of the ruler
		Alliance between monarchy and nobility: mainly in favour of the monarch.
		Religious Unity
		Efficient Taxation
		More State Control over economic activity
		Large standing army: a source of intimidation
		Expansionist policies
		Expansion of Educational, cultural, scientific institutions
		Alliance between the crown and the dominant church
		
France
	Aims of the Crown:
		Wars of reformation devastated most of France.
		Henry IV (1589-1610)
			Before:
				When Henry IV took power, France was a divided country.
				Nobility was too powerful: need to be subjugated
				Previously, any new tax would be refused by the local Parliaments. That reduced the effect of country's response to the religious conflicts
				Economy needed to be overhauled
			During:
				Edict of Nantes (1598)
					Called that the country had one dominant religion.
					Reduced religious conflicts.
				Economic reforms:
					Taxes were increased
					New taxes were pushed through royal parliament rather than local parliaments --> reduced the power of local parliaments.
					Started to sell territorial possessions, territory owners still had to pay 10% of land price in interest.
						Was a major source of income for the crown.
						The territory owner could rule the country as they wished.
					Also allowed land owners to purchase land for hereditary rule:
						Payment of 1/60 of office value yearly.
						This undermined the position of nobility, angered them.
			Assasinated in 1610.
		Louis XIII (1610-43) and Cadinal Richelieu (1585-1642)
			The monarch and cardinal ruled the country together.
			Continued to sell offices, but this was no longer a good source of income.
			Expanded the bureaucracy:
				Reduced the power of nobility
				People were angered as the government's bureaucratic reforms were very effective and intrusive.
			Expanded colonial posessions
		The Fronde (1648-53) - During {Anne of Austria, Cardinal Mazarin}
			Rebellions against the crown:
				Nobility wanted the government to stop creating and selling offices.
				People were previously arrested arbitrarily when they failed to pay taxes.
				Position of the old nobility was restored.
				The rebel state, the Frondeur State, was highly inefficient, corrupt
				Louis XIV + Cardinal Mazarin gains power.
		Louis XIV (1643-1715):
			His view:
				The king must be godlike - "He is the appointee of the god, he executes god's will"
				The king must maintain full control
				The king must be wealthy
					To bribe people
					To maintain a strong army
				The king must impose religious conformity and uniformity
				The king must maintain a strong army
			New court at versailles.
				The powerhouse of the country.
				Everything is centralized
				Appearance of power
				Surveillance of surroundings + visitors
			Reformed bureaucracy
				Bureaucrats chosen on the basis of loyalty rather than nobility
			Government control
				Establishment of an organized police force
				Censorship
			Religious Uniformity
				"One King, One Law, One Faith"
				Religious tolerance ended (Edict of Nantes revoked)
					Emigration of people.
					Prosecution of Protestants, as well as some catholics
			Military expansion:
				Marquis de Louvois: father of modern military
				Royal garrisons in all key towns and provinces
				Army as big as 300,000 men; navy about 160,000 men during his rule.
			Economic changes:
				"Wealth cannot be created out of nowhere"
				Increase in balance of trade to amass more wealth.
				Different ways:
					Fixing the taxation system
					Subsidizing French industries
					Creating education institutions
					Sell monopolies on imports to counter foreign trade
						Expanded mercantilism
					Expansion of transportation network
						New ports
						Expanded merchant fleet
					Internal tariffs and taxes removed to support internal trade.
					Expansion of colonial empire
				Supported wars based on economic principles --> fought to destroy the enemy's trade power.
			War aims:
				Glory, power, prestige.
				Fought to secure the French borders
					Were surrounded by Habsburg empires
				Prioritized defeating the Dutch trade
				Aimed to capture Spanish Netherlands.
				Aimed to weaken Habsburg influence in Germany and Spain.
			Wars:
				War of Devolution
					France annexed South Flanders
				The Dutch War
					Fought to weaken Dutch trade
					Initially successful
					Long and costly
					Franche-Comté annexed by France
				War of the League of Augsburg
					Countries united to contain the growing French power for the first time (War of the First Coalition)
						Austria, Spain, Prussia, The Netherlands, England, Sweden, Saxony, German States)
					France Annexes Elsaß
				War of Spanish Succession
					Louis had control of Spain. Other nations did not want to see a united France and Spain.
					Second Grand Coalition:
						The Netherlands, England, Prussia, Austria, Portugal, Savoy, German States
					France loses direct control of Spain, but France and Spain forbidden from uniting
				Enormous cost to France. France is financially broke, cannot recover from that until the French Revolution.