HIS244 Lecture 10 (19 June 2017)

Napoleonic Period (1799-1814-15)
-------------------------------
Napoleon:
	From Corsica
	Corsica became French a year before Napoleon's birth.
	Came from poor local nobility.
	Went to France, educated in military school since age of 9. Very skilled.
		Humiliated due to humble origins, size, accent
		Graduates at 16
	Joins the army as lieutenant of artillery. General by 24 (1793)
	Returns to Corsica at age of 20, organizes National Guard, draws attention to make Corsica an official part of France.
	1793 - Takes royalist Toulon, defeating the supporting British
	1795 - Suppression of royalist and jacobin riots in Paris
	1796-97 - Given command of the French Army of Italy due to his support.
		Starts the Italian campaign to conquer northern Italy, defeats the Austrians.
		Austrians sue for peace, but not with the French but with Napoleon.
	1798-99 - Convinces France to send an expedition to Egypt (Ottoman at the time.)
		France agrees, wants to build canal, undermine British trade in India.
		Napoleon takes over France. Brings many reforms to the country.
			New legal codes
			New administration
			New education system
		Many scientists follow the army, archeologists investigate the country
		Many institutes establishes.
		Battle of the Nile --> Nelson defeats the French navy, traps Napoleon in Egypt.
			Some escape to France, majority surrenders to Ottomans.
			Napoleon escapes to France.
	1799 - Directorate wants Napoleon to prevent growing royalist sentiments. Mainly due to his popularity.
		Coup d'état, changes the political system in France.
			Triumvirate: Three councils (First Councilor(President) + two oter ones.)
				Napoleon First Councilor
				Triumvirate drafts laws. Parliament votes on laws without debate.
		Napoleon proves to be extremely popular, ambitious, charismatic. Manipulates the system in his favour.
	1800-01 - Napoleon takes command of armies to fight against the 2nd Coalition. Defeats the opposing countries.
		Austrians forced to recognize their territorial losses before
		Helvetic republic formed, modelled on France
		Concordat with Rome
	Concordat with Rome:
		Between Napoleon and Pope Pious VII
		
		Catholicism recognized as the religion of the majority of French people
		Unrestricted freedom of worship (of all religions), church will respect that
		No more confiscation of church property, but whatever was taken before won't be returned
		Bishops and archbishops nominated by state but proposed by other bishops and confirmed by Rome.
		Clergy remains on state salary.
		Oath of loyalty to state remains
		Revolutionary calendar abandoned, sundays restored.
		Papal states recognized
		--> This decision very popular
		--> The countryside pacified
	March 1802 - Peace of Amiens
		Britain recognizes all French conquests
		Returns all French colonies captured since 1789
	1802 - Became counsellor for life
		Use of public national plebiscite for the first time. 99% voted yes.
	"Royalist Threat", argues that royalists attempted to assassinate him.
		Kidnaps and executes Bourbon family members.
	December 2, 1804 - Became emperor
		To prevent bourbon restoration
		Done using a plebiscite
	
Napoleon's Success:
	Common man, easy to relate with, humble origins
	Militarty man, great politician at the same time. Extremely successful at both.
	Never abandons the revolution. "I am the revolution on the horseback"
	Pragmatist, very efficient in his policies
	Very popular, in the way he connects to the people
	Charismatic
	French people were tired of the repetition of previous monarch. They wanted someone strong to be in charge.
	
Napoleon: A tyrant or revolutionary?
	Positive:
		Believed that there cannot be a legitimate government without a constitution. He created one.
		Got public opinion before major decisions. Democracy emphasized.
		An empire, but a republic at the same time.
		Codification of Law. The Napoleonic Code
			Uniformed system of justice
			Equality before the Law
			Property Rights
			Abolishment of Priveleges
			
			Followed by many countries now.
			--> In europe, everyone except GBR
			--> In south america, everyone except Guyana
			--> In north america, Quebec and Louisiana
			--> 80% of Africa	
		Freedom of religion
		Freedom of profession
		Education system expanded
			Universities for free
			Series of Lycees created
			--> open to everyone, but restrictions to women
		Careers open to talent and only talent
			No priveleges, connections, nepotism.
		Administration centralized further.
		Finance system + monetary system reformed.
		Efficient system of taxation. Nobody exempt from tax.
	Negative:
		Secret police very active
		Censorship
			Most of newspapers closed
		Political opponents arrested and exiled
		National Assembly consulted only occasionally when it comes to introducing new laws and regulations.
		Regional administration responsible to the emperor, not the parliament
	Reasons behind his popularity:
		All the achievements of the revolution consolidated under his power
		Brought peace, stability, order
		Businesses expanding very quickly after the removal of restrictions.
		Roads of social advancement open to anyone
		Financial burdens shifted to conquered territories
		New kind of aristocracy emerges, aristocracy of talent and service to the state
		Peasantry is happy (probably only time in history). Lands taken from churches given to the peasants, not to the state
		Restored grandeur of france
	But this greandeur came at the cost of war.
	
Growth of the Empire
	GBR remains hostile
		Protects Naples
		Occupies Malta
		Gradual destruction of Dutch navy
		Occupation of Dutch and French colonies
			South africa conquered
		Sardinia and Corsica isolated
		Attack on Danish Navy, Bombardment of Cophenagen
	GBR tries to build a third coalition.
	French army is massed at Boulogne, at the channel.
		Needs the fleet to cross the channel
		French and Spanish fleet are in Mediterranean, Britain blocking the straits.
	Battle of Trafalgar
		Decoys to distract the British navy
		Brits see through the decoy, return to Europe
		French + Spanish fleets attack British navy, are defeated.
		Britain becomes the dominant navy.
	1805 - Napoleon names himself King of Italy
		3rd Coalition created
		In 6 weeks, Austrians + Russian forces defeated (Battles of Ulm + Austerlitz)
		Austrians sue for peace, lose more lands.
		Also took lands from the HRE.
	1806 - Naples taken over
	1806 - Netherlands taken over
	1806 - HRE dissolved. Confederaton of the Rhine created. (300 states become 36 states) Beginning of the German Unification.
	1806 - Frederick William III declares war on France.
		Prussian defeat in battles of Jena and Auerstadt.
		Prussian army annihilated.
		Berlin occupied.
		French forces remain in Prussia since they never sued for peace.
		Prussian/German resentment continued until 1940.
	1807 - Battles with Russia
		Battle of Prussian Eylau --> first time Napoleon does not win a battle, is a draw due to winter
		Battle of Friedland
		Russia defeated.
		Peace treaty of Tilsit.
			Prussia survives, but remains under French control/dependence
			France acknowledges Russian interests in Eastern Europe + Ottomans. Some cooperation.
			Creation of Duchy of Warsaw. There to threaten Alexander I with military intervention.
	1807 - Kingdom of Westphalia created
		Unified multiple German states into one kingdom.
		Increasing dependence on France.
	1807 - Taken over Portugal
		First time GBR landed on continent, to support Portugal.
		Spain prevents access to Portugal.
	1808 - Invasion of Spain
		There were multile rebellions in Spain. France had to stabilize the region.
		France had some trouble in the region, in the invasion.
	1809 - Fourth Coalition (GBR, Austria).
		Battle of Wagram --> Bloodiest battle of Napoleonic Era.
		Vienna occupied, harsh peace treaty on Austria.
		Austria brought under partial French control/dependence.
	1810 - Netherlands incorporated into France.

Reasons behind Coalitions
	The european monarchs did not see France as a "traditional empire", they see this still as a revolutionary France.
		Illegitimate and pursued illegitimate policies.
		Constitution and plebiscites not popular with european monarchs. --> "Illegitimate people's government"
			This is a dangerous idea for Austria and Russia.
		Napoleon did not restore old social order.
			He prioritized merit rather than birth.
	Wherever Napoleon occupied:
		Old social systems (serfdom, priveleges) abolished
		Napoleonic code + some form of constiutional government established
		Free public education introduced
			Dangerous for Austria and Russia
		Traditional economic systems broken
		Introduced equal rights to minorities
			Dangerous for multiple empires
		Encouraged local nationalism
			VERY dangerous.
	--> Seriously disturbed the balance of power in Europe

Reasons behind Military Success
	Development of artilery with deadly efficiency and quality
	Speed and agility of French forces (~30km per day for infantry and artillery, 50km for cavalry)
		For comparison, American and German armoured formations advanced ~50km per day.
	New formations. Concentrated at breaking point of enemy.
		Mass artillery bombardments
		Voltigeurs --> sniping enemy officers
		--> This is the base of Blitzkrieg.
	Highly motivated citizen-soldiers fighting for their own country, rather than drafted soldiers in armies.
		Advancement in rank is also allowed in French army. This motivated soldiers to do better. "Army of promotion"
		Napoleon respected all his soldiers, motivating them.
	Logistical improvements. Field hospitals. Soldiers' needs taken care of.
	Enemies of France not coordinated in their efforts.