HIS244 Lecture 2 (17 May 2017)

Great Britain, the Netherlands, Spain
-------------------------------

Spain
	By 1648, was the strongest country worldwide.
		-First modern empire
		Had colonies all around the world
		Was under control of Habsburg Dynasty --> Union of HRE + Spain
		Very strong military (Reconquista successful.)
		Effective global trade.
		Flow of silver + gold from America.
	
	Also had many problems:
		The empire was overstretched.
			The worldwide territorial possessions always required defence and attention of the military
			The bullion convoys were easy targets for raiders
			Severe taxation slowed the growth of the country
		Many wars
			England: 37 years
			French: 98 yers
			Also the Dutch
			
		Philip's idea: counter reformation --> requires funds to be implemented
			Alienated people in reformed regions.
		
		Charles divided the empire
			Gave HRE to one of his sons
			Kept the rest.
			
		Economic Problems:
			Uneven taxation: Controlled by local lords, still under orders of the king
			Overtaxation, also high inflation.
			Constant wars --> high expenses, rising debts --> nobody wanted to invest
			Peasants didn't gtow crops because of fixed grain prices --> Agriculture failed --> dependent on food imports
			Piracy by other countries caused problems.
			
			==> Economic decline. 
		
		By 1659 (Treaty of Pyrenees), French took over world dominance.
		
The Netherlands (Low Countries) (Benelux)
	First defined by Karl der Größe, when the empire was divided into 3 (800's)
	Taken over by the Habsburgs by 1400's-1500's.
	Divided into 3 regions:
		Heartland
			Flanders
			Brabant
			Hainaut
			Artois
		Maritime Provinces
			Friesland
			Utrecht
			Holland
			Zealand
		Eastern Provinces
			Luxemburg
			Limburg
			Gelderland
			Overijssel
			...
			
		Charles V tried to unify the country. Limited self governance.
		Philip II attempted to improve control over the area
			Targeted protestants in the region
			Stationed Spanish troops
			Heavier taxes --> 10% taxes.
			Reorganized the local church
			
		First rebellion (1566-67)
			Local calvinists break into margaret's palace and announced their demands
				Asked for religious freedom
				--> right to freely preach
				--> preachers increase exponentially 
				--> people rise against the catholic people fearing that the spanish may oppress them 
				--> calvinists raid catholic churches
				--> spain intervenes. they take over the calvinist-captured settlements. calvinist uprising ends.
			Duke of Alva arrives with 10,000 troops (August 22,1567)
				Margaret forced to resign
				Strict anti-reformation measures
				Council of troubles --> many tried, condemned, executed for rebellion.
				Prosecution of calnists
				All self-government canceled.
				
		Second Rebellion (1572-76)
			Britain asks Dutch settlements to join William of Orange in a rebellion. Many settlements join the rebellion.
			Alva responds quickly, defeats all rebel forces, crushes the rebel towns
			Alva has a brutal approach, destroys rebel settlements
				--> people are encouraged to resist rather than surrendering.
				
			The Dutch opened the dikes to flood lands where were invaded by the Spanish
				--> forced the Spanish forces to retreat.
				--> raised costs for Spanish
				--> Spanish forces mutinied often
				--> Alva recalled to Spain.
			
			Spanish forces sack Dutch cities because they were not paid by the Spanish cities
				The Spanish Fury: 8000 people in Antwerpen killed, city partiallly burned
				
				
			September 22,1576: Pacificaation of Ghent
				-->Spanish army leaves
				-->More autonomy in the netherlands
				
				
		Collapse of Rebel Unity
			After the rebellion was successful, there wasn't many things holding the rebels together.
			The southern half (not calvinists) fears that the northern provinces will invade. They recall the spanish forces to the region.
			Spain tries to invade the northern provinces again.
				-->failure.
				-->enormous costs
				==>spain accepts full northern netherlands autonomy in 1648.
		

	====AFTER THIS POINT IS MORE IMPORTANT MATERIAL ON NED====
	Political System:
		First modern republic
			Will be copied by many nations (France, USA, ...)
			Accidental --> could not find a monarch, nobody accepted offers.
			-Balance of power
			-Checks and balances
			-Superiority of court over the government
			Still an oligarchic system, favours the rich but the opinion of the poor is also important.
			
	Economic success
		Was already a very important economic region in Europe.
		Became THE most important economic region in Europe around this time.
		Towns very close to production facilities, efficient transport systems.
		Dominance in trade.
			-Efficient low crew, low maintenance, Fluyt ships
			-Traded in every goods, every part of the world.
		Created effective banks, stock markets
		Shareholding companies (Setting up companies by investment, not capital)
			--> Growth of the middle class
			--> Good living standards, better than the rest of Europe.
		---> Amsterdam became the economic center of Europe.
		
		Massive colonial empire, on many parts of the world
			Empire's growth not by conquest, but by building trade ports.
			The local people did not want to trade with other countries because Dutch trade was more profitable for natives.
		Monopolies of trade with most of Asia.
		
	Religious tolerance
		Officially calvinists
		Full tolerance to all other sects
		Open to religious immigrants
			--> Contributed to the cultural growth of the Netherlands in this period
				Dutch painting common in this era?
	
	Intellectual growth
		Amsterdam was the intellectual capital of Europe in that period.
		Centre of printing, publishing, exchange of information.
		Many universities opened
		

		
	Decline of the Netherlands
		Dutch economic practices were adopted by many other countries with much larger population and resources
			--> The Dutch Republic lost its edge.


ENGLAND
	Henry VIII
		Attempted to strenghten the monarchy to avoid another War of Roses.
		Became the head of church and state using the parliament to do so.
		Spent a much on personal expenses and wars
			--> Country had financial problems at the end of his reign
		Religion was still left unorganized in England.
	James I (1603-25)
		Left the finances even worse than Henry VIII did. (Tripled the royal debt during his reign)
		Did very little in the country.
		No control over religion.
	Charles I (1625-49)
		More rigid. Believes in his superiority in the country.
		Costly wars that England lost. Increased England's financial troubles
		Imposed new taxes, levies.
			Angered many people
			Refusal would result in arrest (arrest without trial against Magna Carta)
		Dissolved the parliament (1626), ruled the country without the parliament's participation for ~11 years.
		People were converting to other sects, anglicanism was a majority now.
		Scotland was arming for conflict against England, conflict lasted a long time.
		Parliament called after 11 years, dissolved again.
		Civil war (First: 1642-46):
			Rebellion in Ireland
			Defeats in Scotland
			Calls the parliament ("Long Parliament")
				Grand Remonstrance --> Only the parliament can dissolve itself.
				Army to be raised against the Irish, but to be controlled by the parliament.
			Charles rose against the parliament, lost the civil war.
			Battle of Naseby, king surrenders to the Scots
		Parliament divided, mainly based on religious social views
		Charles escapes, starts fighting again, loses again.
		Rump Parliament
			Presbyterians prevent others to enter. Charles is tried and executed by the parliament.
		Other countries break relations with England.
	Commonwealth of England (1649-58)
		Oliver Cromwell gets rid of Rump Parliament (1653) and establishes a military dictatorship
		Irish rebellion is suppressed brutally (1649-53)
		Cromwell levies taxes, engages in conflicts with other religious followers, starts trade wars with the Dutch.
		Country moves towards an absolutist nation.
	The Restoration
		General Monck marches on London, reestablhes the moderate Long Parliament.
		Calls for the invitation of the King, Charles II (1660).
	Charles II (1660-85)
		Disbands New Model Army
		Establihes the dominance of anglican church in religious affairs.
		He is a catholic.
		Declaration of Indulgence (1672) --> Religious tolerance, parliament furious, withdrawn soon.
		Test Act (1673) --> non-anglicans excluded from office
		Country is broke.
	James II (1685-88)
		Openly catholic, marries a catholic, favours catholic ministers.
		Tries to convince parliament to legalise Catholicism.
		William of Orange and Mary is invited to the country to protect protestantism. He accepts.
		William accuses James of acts against protestantism and the country. Lands at England with 15000 troops. James is convinced to leave.
		William and Mary become the co-monarchs of the country.
			Bill of Rights (1689)
			Toleration Act
			Triennial Act
			-An act preventing catholics from becoming monarchs
		
	--> parliament is sovereign
	--> king cannot rule without the parliament
	--> country became officially anglican
	--> finances controlled by the parliament
	grounds for long war with france.
		
	
	
	
	
	
Military Revolution
	Part I
		Battlefields
			Infantry and infantry formations
				Pikemen (Swiss, 1300's)
				Arqebusiers (1520's)
			Dutch modifications
				Countermarch
				Improved Arqebus (1 shot per minute compared to 1 per 3 minutes)
				Improved formations, 1 pikeman per arqebusier
				Rather than cavalry, they had pistol cavalry
			Dominance of infantry in the battlefield
				Pike squares
	Part II
		Defence
			Trace italiene (1530's) - Earth fortresses rather than castles. Star forts
			Improvements in artillery materials
				Cast iron artillery --> more power
				Iron cannon balls (was stone before) --> greater fire power, mass production
			Light field artillery (Gustavus Adolphus)
		Cost
			Professional mercenary armies and standing fleets now --> size and cost of military increased
			Army's size depended on the amount of wealth rather than the status of nobility
				Required more effective taxation system
				Efficient administration and taxation became the backbone of military power
				
				
