HIS244 Lecture 4 (29 May 2017)

East Europe
-------------------------------
Österreich
	After 30 years war + growth of germany, austria's influence over HRE decreased. Rule of emperor was very limited.
		Because of their decreasing influence in europe, the emperor decided to focus on east + southeast.
		Expanded into hungary + ottoman empire + bohemia + moravia + galicia + parts of italy.
	In 1683, vienna besieged. It was a massive failure (defeated by Austrian + German + Polish forces).
		Using their momentum, they signed the first peace with ottoman empire. (Peace of Karlowitz - 1699)
		They gained hungarian territories.
		Peace of Passarowitz (1718) --> acquired Serbia + Wallachia.
	After the War of Spanish Succession, some Spanish territories (italy + benelux) were acquired by Habsburgs. --> check to the french expansion.
	In this period, it was the only true empire in Europe --> many cultures + languages were contained within the empire.
	Leopold (1658-1705)
		Tries to bring centralization to the state after conquest of hungary.
	Charles VI (1705-40) dies without a male heir
		Designates his daughter, Maria Theresa as the heir. Gives territories and powers to other european states to maintain favour.
	Maria Theresa (1740-80)
		Her ascension cuses the War of Austrian Succession, austria loses silesia.
		Clergy is taxed
		Prussian administrative system is imitated.
	Joseph II (1765-90)
		Reforms the country's administration.
			Restructures the countryside administration
			Dissolves monasteries, brings churches to direct state control
			Decides to tax the nobiility as well
				A rebellion, caused by the military and the nobility, succeeds and rolls back some of his reforms.
			State is centralized further, cooperation with the local nobles.
	In this period, the Habsburgs still enjoyed a lavish lifestyle.
	They were still in decline.
	
Preußen
	A long time ago, eastern provinces were settled by Germans. Over time, they became absorbed by the local culture and reformed it.
	The area (Brandenburg) had very little resources.
		Poor soil
		Not close to any centre of trade
		Was raided by many nearby nations.
	Inherited Ostpreußen from Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth.
	Frederick William "the Great Elector"(1640-88)
		Reforms the state.
			New tax code
			hanges in the role of nobility
		Models many things from Louis XIV's reforms
		Sent spies to Versailles to learn more of France and Louis XIV.
	As a result, the country started expanding in Europe (Central europe + into Sweden)
	In exchange of contribution in War of Spanish Succession, they were allowed to use the title "King of Prussia"
	Frederick William I (1713-40) "Sergeant King"
		Reformed the country
			Reduces expenditure
			Expands the army
			Holds extensive records
	Frederick the Great (1740-86)
		With an army of 180,000 occupies Silesia immediately.
		16% of the population in military.
		Parts of nobility (Junkers) incorporated into army.
		People between ages 18 and 40 have to serve in the army periodically, had a massive professional army
		Fought alone in Seven Years War against all neighbouring states.

Muscovite Peasants:
	Largely isolated, a massive orthodox state.
	Sweden focused on preventing Russian access to baltic sea.
	Church is willingly under the monarch. Country centered around the monarch.
	Ivan III
		Eliminated all nobility who could potentially challenge his rule
		Established centralization by force
		Moscow occupied twice, but the country prospered after that.
	Peter the Great (1682-1725)
		Domestic conflicts within his family during his childhood.
		Visited the western countries, (Prussia + Germany + Benelux + England), fascinated by the west.
			Lived like a commoner during his visit.
		Establishes new educational institutions, builds printing presses, creates mathematic institutes.
		Starts the moderniztion of the country.
		Great Northern War
			Country defeated at Narva.
		Forced modernization of the country.
			No beard rule
			Army must wear western uniforms
			Created ministries
			Army received major reforms.
			All nobles must serve in the military
			Non-orthodox not permitted to reside in Russia.
			Subjugation of the Orthodox church
		Under his rule, Russians expanded into Livonia + further Swedish territories.
		Established St. Petersburg. It became the capital.
		Started a lavish, western lifestyle in Russia.
	Russia had no major middle class. Nobles were stronger and the crown cooperated with them. Serfs had a very low standing in the hierarchy.
	
	
Sweden
	A very poor country, little trade.
	Very efficient in military + administration.
		Well formed professional army, use of field artillery.
	Military declined after the costs increased.
	
Structure of Absolutist State:
	Achievements:
		The structure of Absolutist state is the base of modern state
		Turned a great number of local principalities and kingdoms into a large, centralized, unified nation.
		Efficient and effective administration. Branches run by specialists.
		Provides a greater sense of peace and stability within the country.
		Leads to the creation of modern diplomacy, establishment of foreign offices
	Problems:
		Distanced the ruler from the ruled. Decision passing by middle men more common.
		Middle-class professionals served in the new administration, but their number was not adequate for the size of the states.
		
Enlightened Absolutism:
	Emergence:
		Idea: the country's purpose is to serve the people.
		People more literate in this era, more aware of politics.
		Cameralism (Germany): "Monarch's responsibility is to take care of people"
	Structure:
		Improving infrastructure of the country
		Abolishing serfdom
		Further control over the church + nobility
		Great level of tolerance to minorities.
		Improved legal codes, financial and taxation systems.
	
Social Order:
	Three Basic Strata
		Applying the principle of "The Great Chain of Being"
		**Monarchy** -- Clergy -- Nobility -- Everyone Else (the Third Estate)
		The societal structure is immobile; crossing between strata is nearly impossible.
		Clergy
			A majority of the clergy come from the aristocracy.
			Parish priests are the at the bottom of this strata. They are usually at the same level as the parishers.
		Nobility
			Divided in ranks, status, wealth.
			Aristocracy
				Had vast amounts of lands
			Landless nobility.
				Had only title
				"Barefoot nobility" --> had title, but no resources at all.
				Served in the military.
			About 10% in Spain, Poland. 0.5% in England, 0.3% in Netherlands.
			Nobility of the Sword:
				Date back to early years of the kingdom. Very few families
			Nobility of the Robe
				"Gentry" in england. --> those who joined this class later on, mainly by purchase/appointment to title.
			Exempt from most of taxation. Mostly well educated. Tour of Europe common.
		Clergy
			...
		The Third Estate
			Majority of the popultion.
			Also divided to different classes.
			Majority of taxation come from this class. Give tithe (part of total produce) to clergy.
				They provide ~50% of their total income to upper classes.
				
			People of Towns & Cities:
				Very few cities of above 100,000 people (1700). This number reached 22 inby 1800.
				Mostly about 2000 to 5000.
				Urban population rose greatly between 1600 and 1800, reaching 20% by 1800.
				Guild System (Economic division)
					Like clans of artisans and merchants / union.
					The guilds controlled the economic activity as well as political life in the town.
				Burgers (Legal division)
					About 50% of town population
					Burgers were considered to be the official residents of the town.
				Specialization of production of towns.
					Most towns specialized in production of a certain goods. About 50% of populace would be involved in production and trade of that certain product.
				Close, interactive working environment.
				High migration levels
					People migrate to cities. Also high mortality rates.
				High literacy rates
					About 50% in towns
					People started learning more about world events rather than only their surroundings
			
			Peasants:
				Between 45% to 90% of population.
				Varying in status. Everyone exploited to a various degree.
				Periodically reblelling, but mostly unsuccessful, but some actually changed state structures.
				
Challenges of 16th and 17th centuries:
	Groving poverty, inflation, food prices.
	Life conditions of third estate very low. There are few wealthy enclaves in certain countries.
	Depending on one crop or one type of produce depend on price fluctuations, harvest failures and trade issues.
		Leads to periodic famines or crisis in regions.
	
Life in the era:
	Based on family + communal ties.
		Isolated from the outside interference
		Production + trade is also affected
	Amount of land owned largely affects the quality of life.
	Young adults must provide service to make a living.
	
	Marriage and family:
		Almost mandatory. Family also provides protection in this era.
		Once married, it is expected to start a new household.
			People are expected to establish households independently, so they would marry later to have enough wealth to do so.
		Large extended families in southern + eastern europe as families weren't expected to become independent with marriage.
		Women were pregnant every 2-2.5 years, many children in families. Half of them would die before adulthood. Half of the survivors would later die from other reasons.
		Children grew up more independently.
			After the age of 7, they also supported their family economically.
	
	Diet and consumption:
		Diet based on bread (~60% of income). An average of 1-1.5kg a day.
		Some dairy + small amounts of fats and meat. Some fruits and vegetable.
		Raw fruit considered dangerous by people.
		Considerable beer and wine consumption. (1.7 - 2.5L per day)
		
		Nobility had a lavish diet. Consumed lots of meat + delicacies brought from overseas.