HIS244 Lecture 6 (5 June 2017)

The Enlightenment
-------------------------------
What is it?
	--> "It is the freedom from self-imposed tutelage. Dare to think" -Emmanuel Kant (It is freedom from adhering to others' ideas.)
	
Old world view:
	There was an authority which told people what to do, how to think, etc.
	Religion was an important part of community. Religious identity important.
	Monarchy is at the top of the pyramid. Can't change own class.
	Following theories into creation of the world not allowed. Enforced by the church.
Emerging new world view:
	Belief in reason.
	Descartes --> universe can (must) be explained by natural laws.
	Pursuit of knowledge is a secular activity and cannot be obstructed by other parties.
	Authority only possible if it follows the previous 4 issues. It should not be based on tradition, but on reason.
	If there are natural laws, then there are natural rights.
Foundations:
	Scientific revolution
	New methods of inquiry and resoning
	Rise in secularism
	Embracement of reason and human intellect
	
	Social and economic foundations:
		Economic boom due to improvements in production + international trade. --> extended urban culture. Much richer upper-middle class.
		Increasing levels of literacy --> ~50%
		New channels of intellectual communication.
	What made one a philosopher?
		Confidence in:
			science
			social reforms
			reason and human intellect
			power of knowledge
		Being sarcastic and cynical. Must question the nature of everything.
		Must always aim to improve and change the society.
	****Key terms of enlightenment:
		REASON
			Everything is to be doubted and investigated. Nothing should be taken at its face value
		NATURE
			Natural harmony, its rules.
		PROGRESS
			Everything must change, move forward.
Starting the change:
	Belief that pen is mightier than the sword:
		Philosophers believed that they could win over people with their words, with their publications.
		They constantly wrote their ideas and published them.
	Tre republic of letters:
		Informal international community.
		Members communicate with & visit each other constantly. It is a community which is not limited by borders.
	Use of all possible mediums of communication
	Creation of public sphere:
		New culture out of official culture. Grows in places where intellectual communication is common/possible.
	Dissemination of ideas
	Salon culture:
		Always run by women
		People gather, debate certain topics.
		Social & intellectual gatherings.
	Popular culture:
		2nd half of 18th culture.
		Spreading ideas in public.
		Inclusion of ideas in popular songs, works.
		
	=== Reason + Knowledge + Social Criticism + Popular education + Public Commentary + Intellectual Development --> PROGRESS
	
	
EARLY ENLIGHTENMENT (1680-1715)
	Francis Bacon (1561-1621)
		Science and phiosophy should be practical
			Should be for the improvement of societ
		Nature should be conquered for the benefits of mankind
	René Descartes (1596-1650)
		Cartesian materialism --> everything which is material should be investigated
		Doubting everything
		Questioning everything to remove flaws in logic.
		Reason above all.
	Developments:
		With the advanements in science, it became common for people in courts to establish debate groups.
			Quarrel of the Ancients and the Modernists.
		Belief that golden age was not in the past, but in the future.
		Growing skepticism. Many reformations, church not as strong.
		Waning of Eurocentrism
		Discovery of text that contradict the events of the bible. Written records dating before the time of bible. --> is the bible a reliable source of historical knowledge?
		Natives in America are not christian, but very moral and peaceful people --> is christian morality not the only one?
	Organized Religion and Deism:
		Widely popular in people educated in this period.
		God is a creator, but does not intervene.
		Believes in god, but does not believe in / follow any scriptures.
	Pierre Bayle (1647-1706)
		Pious calvinist.
		Criticised the ways of the new science, intelligence
		He wrote an extemely influential book in the defense of faith, but it is very effective in advancing the cause of reason over faith.
		Was very effective in spreading the ideas of doubt, reason.
	Bishop Joseph Buttler (1690 - 1752)
		Pursuit of happiness -> happiness can be found on this earth only. Material.
	John Locke (1632-1734)
		Lockean Empiricism
			Humans are born as blank slate, shaped by their senses and what they think about their surroundings.
			Humans are capable of generating ideas, but they remain personal thoughts only. Idaes are generated with interactions with others, combining efforts.
			Exchange of ideas lead to universal thoughts
		Lockean Politics
			Humans have 3 universal + natural rights: Life, Liberty, Property.
			Nature of political power should not be giving away freedom for protection. It should be a contract where a person gives some of their personal liberties for the protection of the remaining liberties. Any governemnt which does not respect the individual rights should be rebelled against.
THE HIGH ENLIGHTENMENT
	Charles Louis de Secondat, Baron de Le Brede et de Montesquieu (1689-1755)
		Noble, deist.
		On a visit to England, he was impressed by the system of checks and balances there. 
			Thought: A system based on abuse of power was deeply concerning. (About France?)
		Proposed a new political system:
			Separation of Executive, Legislative, Judicial powers.
			System of checks and balances.
			Law is the base of formation of state and society.
			Laws must be reviewed and changed with the changed needs of the society.
			Political system must be based on reason rather than tradition and priveleges
		--> Base for US political system and constitution.
	François-Marie Arouet, 'Voltaire' (1694-1778)
		Persecuted intellectual --> spent 11 months for offending a noble with his publications. Escaped to England.
		Educated by Jesuits.
		Wrote "Candide" (1759) --> written as an attack on the French society system, church.
		Reason over superstition
		Very strongly against religion, superstition, intolerance.
			Still believes that religions should exist.
			It is very useful for common people: It provides moral and ethical values to the people.
	Denis Diderot (1713-1814)
		Atheist
		Focused on knowledge. --> "Greatest tool of society"
			Knowledge must be available to all people
			Tried to spread knowledge
		The Encyclopedia, Thousands of short articles about various things. Detailed explanation of their backgrounds.
			--> An attempt to organize and classify all knowledge.
	Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778)
		Father of modern democracy.
		Not a part of the salon culture. Of lower social status.
		He's a french speaking Swiss --> outsider also because of his nationality.
		Primitive societies are just and moral. It is civilizations that corrupt people.
		Lower class people are moral and peaceful, as long as they are interrupted.
		Sovereignity of the state does not lie with the monarch, god, or oligarchy; it lies with the common people.
		Everyone has their rights. People form political systems in a process of constant negotiation; give up some rights temporarily to reach a compromise with everyone.
		Everyone has to participate in the political system.
			If not, the person's rights are not acknowledged fully
			The needs of the majority are not represented, can be corrupted more easily.
			"Tyranny of majority"
	Cesare Beccaria (1738-1794)
		Society must be understood as a social contract where members give up the least personal freedoms in return for greater happiness.
		Any legitimate form of authority must be corrupted, or it is corrupted.
		Governments must be as minimal in its interference as possible.
		Criminal law must be constructed so that unncecessary punishments should be removed, they must be purposeful.
LATE ENLIGHTENMENT
	David Hume (1711-1776)
		Most of his work was published after his work before they were too radical.
		"Passion, rather than reason, governs our nature."
		There is no proof of universal laws, there is no proof of god's involvement in nature. Nowhere in natural world is there proof of god. --> no proof of religious.
		Religion is the person's choice of truth, no one should intervene it, but there is no proof of its existence.
	Julien Offroy de La Mettrie (1709-1751)
		Must choose between spiritualism and materialism. There is no midde ground (arguments clearly in favour of materialism.)
		No proof of soul, it does not exist. Will comes from the structure of brain and central nervous system.
	Immanuel Kant (1724-1804)
		Kantian Ethics:
			Applicable to everything, cannot be changed.
			-Can I rationally will that everyone act as I propose to act? --> If no, do not do it.
			-Does my action respect the goals of human beings rather than merely using them for my own pursıits? --> If no, then do not do it.